Title: Semi-Automated Knowledge Engineering and Process Mapping for Total Airport Management

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.26076v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 00:30:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Semi-Automated Knowledge Engineering and Process Mapping for Total Airport Management 

Darryl Teo, Adharsha Sam, Chuan Shen Marcus Koh, Rakesh Nagi, Nuno Antunes Ribeiro 

Aviation Studies Institute Singapore University of Technology and Design Singapore 

{darryl teo | adharsha devahi | marcus koh | rakesh nagi | nuno ribeiro }@sutd.edu.sg 

Abstract —Documentation of airport operations is inherently complex due to extensive technical terminology, rigorous regu-lations, proprietary regional information, and fragmented com-munication across multiple stakeholders. The resulting data silos and semantic inconsistencies present a significant impediment to the Total Airport Management (TAM) initiative. This paper presents a methodological framework for constructing a domain-grounded, machine-readable Knowledge Graph (KG) through a dual-stage fusion of symbolic Knowledge Engineering (KE) and generative Large Language Models (LLMs). The framework employs a scaffolded fusion strategy in which expert-curated KE structures guide LLM prompts to facilitate the discovery of semantically aligned knowledge triples. We evaluate this methodology on the Google LangExtract library and investigate the impact of context window utilization by comparing localized segment-based inference with document-level processing. Contrary to prior empirical observations of long-context degradation in LLMs, document-level processing improves the recovery of non-linear procedural dependencies. To ensure the high-fidelity provenance required in airport operations, the proposed framework fuses a probabilistic model for discovery and a deterministic algorithm for anchoring every extraction to its ground source. This ensures absolute traceability and verifiability, bridging the gap between ”black-box” gen-erative outputs and the transparency required for operational tooling. Finally, we introduce an automated framework that operationalizes this pipeline to synthesize complex operational workflows from unstructured textual corpora. 

Index Terms —Knowledge Graphs, LangExtract, Context Win-dow, Airport Management 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Organizations now gather vast volumes of data from a wide range of sources, with individual departments and business units often managing their own datasets. However, many barriers to information sharing exist, including conflicts of interest, regulations [1] and low interoperability standards [2]. As such, this information often ends up locked within separate systems, ranging from spreadsheets to databases to technical reports. This insulation of data obscures necessary information despite it having already been acquired by another entity within the same business unit. Furthermore, while technical jargon facilitates clarity within a given occupation, it becomes a fertile ground for miscommunication when members of dif-ferent operations use different terminology to refer to the same object [3]. Such inconsistencies can have severe consequences. A primary cause of the tragic Tenerife Airport Disaster in 1977 was a breakdown in communication attributable to non-standard terminology; poor visibility and the pilot’s misinter-pretation of phrases such as ”OK” and ”takeoff” as clearance instructions ultimately led to the catastrophic collision of two B747 aircraft and 583 fatalities [4]. The scale of contemporary data infrastructures necessitates automated integration frameworks to mitigate the risks associ-ated with organizational data silos. In this context, establishing data provenance is paramount, providing a formal trace of the data origin and computational processes governing its ingestion [5]. This work investigates the utility of LLMs in facilitating domain-specific knowledge fusion for the con-struction of logically consistent KGs. In this architecture, an ontology serves as the formal, machine-readable specification of a shared conceptualization, defining the classes, properties, and constraints of the domain, while the KG populates this framework with interconnected entities and relationships ex-tracted from operational data. By grounding LLM extractions in the nuances of airport operations through high-quality few-shot prompting, and aligning the KG structure with the NASA Air Traffic Management (ATM) ontology, the framework en-sures semantic alignment and rigorous data provenance across complex, multi-stakeholder procedural workflows [6]. This paper presents a systematic evaluation of the LangEx-tract framework [7] for structured information extraction, specifically examining the impact of varying scales on the aircraft turn-round process from the EUROCONTROL Airport Collaborative Decision-Making (A-CDM) manual [8].The A-CDM framework is an industry standard designed to improve operational efficiency by sharing real-time data between pi-lots, ATCs, and ground handlers through a sequence of 16 Milestones that track a flight’s progress and A-CDM Platform updates. This document serves as a robust benchmark due to its description of a complex, time-sensitive workflow. Its logical triggers and state transitions provide a rigorous environment for evaluating the framework’s ability to extract precise pro-cedural knowledge. Establishing this KE framework supports the TAM initiative, a EUROCONTROL concept that seeks to move toward proactive, performance-driven operations. In particular, this work addresses the need for a holistic view of airport processes, providing the high-fidelity data integration necessary to synchronize airside and landside performance into a single, predictive source of truth. 

> arXiv:2603.26076v1 [cs.AI] 27 Mar 2026

The selection of LangExtract is predicated on its capacity for: (i) high-fidelity source grounding, ensuring data prove-nance; (ii) optimized extraction architectures for long-context windows; and (iii) deterministic structured output generation. These capabilities are particularly salient for automatically synthesizing machine-readable KGs from unstructured oper-ational documentation. Through empirical evaluation on the A-CDM milestones, we show that LangExtract can reliably extract procedural entities and relationships under both page-level and document-level inference settings. Contrary to prior studies, document-level processing improves the recovery of non-linear procedural dependencies while preserving sentence-level provenance for all extracted knowledge triples. Subsequently, we evaluate the utility of the resulting KG. By anchoring analyses in canonical KG concepts, the architecture enables automated generation of artifacts including process maps, simulations, and scenario analyses. In pursuit of aviation requirements for interpretability, provenance, and stakeholder attribution, the methodology defines an automated swimlane generation framework with source grounding (implementation available on GitHub 1). The principal contribution of this work is the systematic integration and evaluation of algorithmic toolchains for synthesizing operational KGs and analytical artifacts in alignment with the TAM initiative [9]. 

Structure. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: §II provides a comprehensive review of the relevant literature. Section III details the methodological framework, including prompt engineering, KG modeling principles, the LangExtract-based extraction pipeline, and the algorithmic generation of swimlane diagrams. Section IV presents the experimental setup and an empirical evaluation of the re-sults. Section V discusses subsequent applications of domain-grounded KGs. Finally, Section VI offers concluding remarks and outlines directions for future research. II. L ITERATURE REVIEW 

The evolution of robust semantic modeling frameworks ex-ists at the intersection of formal knowledge representation and automated information extraction. While LLMs have trans-formed the paradigm of information retrieval through high-dimensional vector representations, maintaining the determin-istic rigor required for safety-critical domains necessitates a synergy with established KE algorithmic fusion frameworks [10]. This section evaluates the transition from manually-curated ontological schemas to adaptive, LLM-driven archi-tectures, identifying the technical trade-offs between formal consistency and extraction scalability. Subsection II-A examines foundational KE methodologies, focusing on the utility of formal structures, specifically KGs, in ensuring interoperability and situational awareness across heterogeneous data sources. While traditional KE relies on expert-led curation to ensure semantic accuracy, it is limited by the scalability bottlenecks of manual annotation. We therefore 

> 1https://github.com/darrylteo/autoKE

explore the role of LLMs and their tuning mechanisms includ-ing prompt engineering and context window optimization as critical control mechanisms. These emerging techniques serve to tune the probabilistic outputs of LLMs to adhere to the high standards of formal logical schema, thereby ensuring the accuracy and verifiability of the extracted data. Subsection II-B contextualizes these methodologies within the aviation domain, tracing the progression from founda-tional frameworks, such as the NASA ATM ontology [6], to contemporary LLM-integrated systems. By reviewing these developments, we establish the current boundaries of KE its applications in safety-critical operational modeling. 

A. Knowledge Engineering 

Domain-specific KE remains bottlenecked by manual expert curation to resolve complex semantic relationships [11, 12]. Despite the integration of domain-optimized BERT variants, high-density technical jargon often limits performance, with F1 scores frequently plateauing near 70% [13]. While semi-automated NLP pipelines and alignment strategies attempt to bridge this gap, they scale poorly due to significant ”cold start” dependencies and the administrative requirement of extensive manual labeling [14]. Consequently, there is a distinct lack of fully autonomous frameworks capable of synthesizing formal KGs without extensive expert intervention. Recent advances leverage LLMs to automate KG generation from unstructured documents [15, 16, 17]. While effective on small datasets, these models struggle to scale to the extensive corpora typical of real-world applications and often necessitate human-in-the-loop validation. Although prompt engineering enhances output accuracy [18, 19, 20], the probabilistic nature of LLMs remains a challenge. However, incorporating formal logical structures, such as using existing KGs to constrain prompt architecture, has yielded significant improvements [18, 17, 21]; for instance, KnowPrompt [21] reported accuracy gains from 39.9% to 53.1%. Efforts to improve scalability and accuracy have focused on tuning and refinement for long context windows, which frequently suffer from the ”lost-in-the-middle” phenomenon [22]. Mitigation strategies include chunking, parallel process-ing, and iterative extraction [7], alongside algorithmic devel-opments such as self-extension, positional interpolation, short-length recovery, and Recurrent Context Compression [23, 24, 25]. Despite these advances, such approaches often encounter prohibitive computational costs, marginal performance gains, or reconstruction errors due to excessive instruction length. Critically, no existing fully automated pipeline performs ex-traction, KG construction, and process map generation without extensive expert guidance or tedious annotation. 

B. Aviation Applications of Knowledge Engineering 

Historically, KE in aviation has been confined to aircraft design and manufacturing within vertically integrated corpo-rate structures [26, 27]. While these frameworks successfully leveraged semantic search to optimize internal manufacturing pipelines [28, 29], they rely on centralized, proprietary data repositories. A critical research gap remains in the automated synthesis of KGs for the broader airport ecosystem—a frag-mented domain defined by decentralized interactions among independent stakeholders with disparate operational protocols and regulatory constraints. Within the aviation literature, the NASA ATM ontology [6] represents a foundational effort in domain formalization, providing comprehensive taxonomies for ATM and trajectory logic. However, while it effectively models flight-centric se-quences, such as takeoff and landing, its scope does not fully encapsulate the heterogeneous, multi-stakeholder ground op-erations (e.g., baggage handling or refueling) critical to TAM. This creates a procedural void in modeling the high-density, collaborative workflows required for integrated operations. Consequently, existing frameworks lack the granular, cross-stakeholder interoperability necessary for a unified semantic representation of the airport ecosystem. More recently, LLMs have been introduced to parse the vast volumes of unstructured technical aviation documents. State-of-the-art implementations, including AviationGPT [30] and AviationCopilot [31], demonstrate the efficacy of domain-specific LLMs in providing conversational assistance to pi-lots and engineers. These tools excel at natural-language querying across extensive document collections, frequently reporting high accuracy (exceeding 90%) through fine-tuning on domain-specific corpora. However, because these models function primarily as black-box algorithms, data provenance remains elusive; the path from the source text to generated response is often obscured by the model’s probabilistic na-ture. Consequently, a disparity remains between the utility of conversational LLMs and the formal requirements of airport operational modeling, where absolute verifiability and ground-ing in authoritative sources are non-negotiable. 

C. Research Gap and Motivation 

Despite advances in knowledge-driven systems, the auto-mated synthesis of verifiable operational models from un-structured text remains an open challenge in multi-stakeholder, safety-critical environments. Airport domain documentation is characterised by dense technical nomenclature, heterogeneous abbreviations, and tightly coupled procedural dependencies. Under these conditions, general-purpose LLMs can achieve high recall yet consistently fail to satisfy the deterministic, au-ditable requirements of operational decision support. Existing ontological efforts, such as the NASA ATM ontology [6], sup-ply rigorous terminological scaffolding but lack the assertional and procedural density required to represent ground operations across independent stakeholders. Conversely, recent domain-adapted LLM deployments, including AviationGPT [30] and AviationCopilot [31], demonstrate strong conversational and retrieval performance; however, their black-box architectures fundamentally preclude traceability and authoritative source grounding, attributes that are non-negotiable in safety-critical operational contexts. A secondary and largely unaddressed gap concerns the downstream translation of extracted knowledge into actionable operational artifacts. Current pipelines treat KG construction as a terminal objective, providing no principled mechanism for converting structured graph representations into human-interpretable process visualizations. This limitation is particu-larly acute in multi-stakeholder environments where technical jargon and operational workflows diverge across organizational boundaries, and where explicit stakeholder attribution is a prerequisite for regulatory compliance and coordination. This work addresses both gaps through a systematic evalu-ation of the LangExtract framework as an engine for domain-specific knowledge fusion. We assess the effect of vary-ing context window length on extraction veracity by con-trasting segment-level inference against document-level infer-ence, thereby quantifying the empirical cost of the ”lost-in-the-middle” phenomenon in a structured extraction setting. LangExtract’s architecture is further evaluated on its provision of explicit source text grounding, a capability routinely absent from general-purpose models, ensuring that every extracted assertion remains anchored to a verifiable textual provenance. Building on the resulting KG, we introduce an algorithmic pipeline for the automated generation of swimlane diagrams. By deriving process visualizations directly from the formal graph structure, the framework ensures that each procedural step is both machine-interpretable and attributed to a respon-sible stakeholder entity. This dual grounding in both formal semantics and explicit organizational accountability supports compliance with stringent safety regulations and advances the interoperability objectives of the TAM initiative [9]. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

The proposed architecture implements a scaffolded sym-bolic fusion strategy (see Fig. 1) designed to bridge the gap between deterministic domain knowledge and probabilistic generative models. The pipeline begins with Operational Data Ingestion, which focuses on the textual corpora of the 16 A-CDM Milestones. This phase incorporates data cleaning and normalization (as necessary) to resolve jargon inconsistencies, ensuring the reliability of the downstream extraction process. While this implementation centers on text documents, the architecture is designed to accommodate future expansion into multimodal inputs, specifically the conversion of audio and visual operational recordings into LLM-readable data formats. The core of the methodology lies in the Scaffolded Sym-bolic Fusion stage. Here, an expert-curated KG provides the structural constraints used to generate high-fidelity prompts and few-shot examples for the LLM Triple Extraction phase. By using symbolic logic to scaffold the generative model, the system ensures that the extracted entities and relationships are semantically aligned with established aviation standards. This dual-stage process culminates in Operational Artifact Synthesis, where the newly populated KG is algorithmically converted into stakeholder-attributed process maps and swim-lane diagrams, providing a verifiable and unified source of truth for airport management. This remainder of this section outlines the architectural framework of the proposed system. Subsection III-A formal-Operational Data Ingestion  

> Scaffolded Symbolic Fusion
> LLM Knowledge Extraction
> Operational Artifact Synthesis
> Fig. 1. Knowledge Engineering Architecture for A-CDM Milestones

izes the KG representation and the foundational KGs that govern our semantic schema. Subsequently, §III-B details the implementation of LangExtract, formalizing our approach to prompt engineering and context window optimization. Finally, we define the evaluation metrics employed to quantify extrac-tion veracity and structural consistency. 

A. Knowledge Graphs 

A KG is an explicit, machine-readable model of the do-main: a controlled vocabulary of classes, properties, indi-viduals, and the relationships that connect them. Serving as a single authoritative source of truth, KGs facilitate data association across heterogeneous datasets [32, 18], support richer queries and analytics, and enable reasoning — for example, inferring that a ”jet bridge” and a ”remote stand” are mutually disjoint entities. By standardizing terminology, the KG acts as a shared semantic layer that harmonizes data interpretation across disparate systems. This stands in contrast to traditional documentation tools such as process maps and commercial workflow software, which typically lack standardized vocabularies, produce siloed representations, and cannot be consumed by external applications. In safety-critical, multi-stakeholder environments, the formal logical consistency and computational reusability of a KG are therefore not merely convenient properties but operational requirements. Transitioning from system modeling to the extraction of authoritative stakeholder knowledge presents significant opera-tional and technical challenges. In the aviation sector, business units often operate under strict privacy constraints, effectively acting as internal competitors who guard proprietary opera-tional logic, metrics or other datasets. As a result, knowledge elicitation becomes fragmented, where definitions vary, access to examples is limited, and essential details may be withheld. Beyond organizational barriers, the high operational cost and time requirements of traditional knowledge elicitation, such as stakeholder workshops and interviews, further limit the scalability of this approach. These constraints make it hard to understand the domain, identify canonical concepts, or reconcile semantic differences across teams. To mitigate these constraints, we adopt a modular disclo-sure strategy drawn from the NASA ontology [6], with the KG architected as layers, and are conditionally disseminated depending on the stakeholder. The base layer, accessible to all parties, contains only high-level classes and process structures that do not expose proprietary detail, and additional modules are shared selectively as required. Where complete information remains unavailable, simplifying assumptions are introduced, for example, treating certain processes as black boxes with defined inputs and outputs, or modeling competing units as separate subdomains that interact only through governed interfaces. Leveraging the capacity of KGs for incremental fulfillment [33], this approach ensures the model remains func-tional under data access constraints while allowing progressive refinement as model maturity increases. The proposed schema is scaffolded upon the NASA ATM ontology [6] and the Changi Airport Petri maps [34], and is implemented in Prot´ eg´ e, a widely adopted open-source ontology editor. This schema serves as a formalized tem-plate, which may be populated manually, or via structured extraction pipelines as described in §III. While the full class hierarchy encompasses both landside and airside operations (see Fig. 2), this work focuses on three classes: Procedure, Sequenced Item, and Stakeholder; and two object properties: hasNext and hasStakeholder. The broader class structure is retained to ensure extensibility and alignment with existing domain KGs [6, 34].  

> Fig. 2. Prot´ eg´ e Airport Operations Class Schema

B. LangExtract 

The transition from unstructured technical corpora to a for-mal KG requires an extraction engine that accurately captures entities and their relationships. Standard LLM-based extraction is susceptible to hallucination, where the model synthesizes plausible but non-existent information [20]. This problem is particularly acute in aviation, where safety-critical documen-tation demands absolute data provenance. The capacity to trace every extracted entity or relationship back to its exact source, down to the specific paragraph and document, is therefore a functional necessity. A primary objective of this work is to evaluate model scalability and mitigate the performance degradation typically observed as the context window expands. While modern LLMs claim support for windows exceeding 128k tokens, prior empirical evidence suggests a catastrophic spike in perplex-ity once sequences surpass native training limits [24], often manifesting as structural incoherence or nonsensical output. We address these potential limitations through the LangExtract framework [7], which enforces structural determinism via schema-guided extraction that maintains explicit data prove-nance through traceable references. By constraining both the prompt architecture and the model’s response to the formal classes defined in curated few-shot examples, LangExtract ensures that the output is immediately machine-readable and compatible with the KG construction pipeline without post-extraction cleaning. As illustrated in Fig. 3, both the few-shot exemplars and the system prompts are explicitly governed by the manually curated Knowledge Graph (KG). These components integrate the class hierarchies and relational schemata defined in §III-A with a targeted corpus of examples from a single A-CDM Milestone [8]. The primary function of this initial ontological seed is to facilitate scaffolded symbolic fusion. By providing a formal structural baseline, it complements the LangExtract framework, ensuring logical alignment across all few-shot prompts and grounding the model’s probabilistic extractions within the deterministic constraints of the airport operations domain.  

> Fig. 3. LangExtract Prompt and Few-shot Examples

The extraction performance is measured by Recall ( R), Precision ( P ), and the F1-Score ( F 1), defined as: 

R = T P T P + F N , P = T P T P + F P , F 1 = 2 · P · RP + R

Recall indicates the framework’s sensitivity in identifying all mandatory operational procedures, Precision measures the structural integrity of extracted triples against the domain schema, and the F1-Score represents the overall reliability of the information retrieval process. Central to this evaluation is the effect of context window length on semantic integrity. Given the perplexity cliff ob-served in technical corpora exceeding native transformer limits [24], we process a 16-page operational manual (approx. 10k tokens) under two modalities: page-level inference to maxi-mize attention density and mitigate the ”lost-in-the-middle” phenomenon [22], and document-level inference to evaluate framework stability over extended, high-density sequences. Data provenance is assessed by auditing the sentence-level source references generated by LangExtract, ensuring that every triple in the resulting KG satisfies the traceability requirements necessary for deployment in safety-critical en-vironments. 

C. Swimlane Diagrams 

Beyond static representation, the proposed framework en-ables dynamic operational modeling in multi-stakeholder en-vironments. By serving as a unified semantic ground truth, the KG mitigates coordination failures arising from conflict-ing technical interpretations [3]. The architecture transforms machine-readable procedural relationships into structured op-erational artifacts, such as swimlane diagrams, ensuring every step is explicitly attributed to a stakeholder in alignment with the interoperability objectives of the TAM initiative [9]. Utilizing the formalized schema, entities, and relationships from the A-CDM KG [8], an automated pipeline was de-veloped for generating swimlane diagrams. These diagrams partition processes into parallel lanes per stakeholder, making ownership explicit across airlines, ground handlers, and air traffic services. Such visualization is well-suited for operator training and for surfacing responsibility gaps during process design or incident review (see Fig. 4). The transformation from KGs to swimlane diagrams is formalized in Algorithm 1. This procedure employs a modified topological sort using Breadth-First Search (BFS) to resolve procedural dependencies, com-puting the longest path to each node for vertical positioning, while horizontal placement is assigned by mapping each process to its respective stakeholder lane.  

> Fig. 4. Swimlane Diagram for the Airport Collaborative Decision-Making Process

To satisfy the verifiability requirements of safety-critical applications, data provenance is integrated directly into the diagram. Each node rendered by drawNode() is linked to its sentence-level source coordinates extracted by LangExtract, anchoring the swimlane in authoritative text. This verifiable audit trail mitigates the risks of LLM hallucination and fosters trust in automated knowledge engineering pipelines. IV. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

This section evaluates LangExtract’s performance in syn-thesizing a coherent KG from the A-CDM manual [8] across varying context window lengths. Milestone processes were first converted from PDF to plain text to be read into LangEx-tract [35]. To benchmark the system and enable knowledge fu-sion, we manually curated a ground-truth KG that exhaustively encodes sequential relations ( hasNext ) and stakeholder re-sponsibilities ( hasStakeholder ). We ensured deterministic evaluation through a high-fidelity few-shot prompt (Fig. 3) de-rived from the ground truth. This prompt facilitates scaffolded symbolic fusion by constraining the LLM’s probabilistic out-puts to the formal domain schema [17]. As illustrated in Fig. 5, LangExtract enforces a structured output schema and preserves the provenance of each triple. This deterministic structure enables seamless conversion of Algorithm 1: drawSwimlane( V, E, S )// Get vertex depth using BFS 

for vertex v ∈ V do if inDegree [v] == 0 then 

depth [v] = 1 

Queue.enqueue (v)

end end while Queue is not empty do 

v = Queue.dequeue () 

for each neighbor u of v do 

depth [u] = max( depth [u], depth [v] + 1) 

inDegree [u] = inDegree [u] − 1

if inDegree [u] == 0 then 

Queue.enqueue (u)

end end end 

// Plot on stakeholder and depth 

for stakeholder s ∈ S do 

drawLane(s) 

for each v ∈ V where sv = s do 

drawNode(depth[v], s) 

end end for edge e ∈ E do 

drawArrow( estart , e end )

end 

extracted entities into KGs via the owlready2 library [36], bypassing the noise typical of unstructured NLP pipelines.  

> Fig. 5. LangExtract Structured Extraction Output With Source Reference

To address the complexity of the extracted procedural knowledge, we performed an exhaustive manual evaluation against the curated ground-truth KG and source A-CDM doc-ument. Each extracted triple was classified as a True Positive (TP) or False Positive (FP), while omitted triples were marked as False Negatives (FN), with sentence-level provenance ver-ified for every entry to ensure high-confidence traceability. Extraction performance is quantified using the metrics defined in §III-B, where alignment between the ground-truth KG and extracted triples are defined as: a TP is a correctly retrieved triple, an FN is an omitted triple from the curated KG, and an 

FP is an erroneous retrieval absent from the ground truth. Comparative analysis using two context window configu-rations: short-context inference, which restricted processing to single-page chunks to maximize LLM attention density, and long-context inference, which processed the entire 16-page corpus in a single pass to evaluate framework robustness against the ”lost-in-the-middle” phenomenon [22]. All ex-periments utilized a fixed configuration ( max_workers=1 )leveraging gemini-2.5-flash with all remaining param-eters at default values to ensure reproducibility.      

> TABLE I PERFORMANCE INFORMATION RETRIEVAL METRICS OF LANG EXTRACT ON THE EUROCONTROL A-CDM M ANUAL

Short-Context Long-Context TP 440 442 FP 18 15 FN 13 8Precision ( P) 0.961 0.967 Recall ( R) 0.971 0.982 F1 Score ( F1 ) 0.966 0.975 The main results are given in Table I. LangExtract at-tains high extraction fidelity across both configurations: short-context inference yields P = 0.961, R = 0.971, and F1 = 0.966, while long-context inference yields P = 0.967, R = 0.982, and 

F1 = 0.975. Document-level processing reduced FNs by 38.5% (13 to 8), produced a modest reduction in FPs, and improved 

R and F1 by 1.1 and 0.9 percentage points respectively. Notably, long-context outperformed short-context inference, contrary to the theoretical expectation of performance degrada-tion under extended sequences. This improvement is attributed to the spatial locality of the documented airport processes: as most related terms and procedural dependencies occur within a three-page span, the expanded context window allows LangExtract to maintain coherence across process boundaries. By avoiding the information loss associated with arbitrary text fragmentation, the model successfully minimized triple omissions and achieved measurably higher recall. The primary driver of FNs across both configurations is the inversion of logical flow, where the effect of a procedure is frequently described prior to the procedure itself. This semantic inversion confuses the LLM under limited context, as insufficient surrounding text prevents correct reordering of events. The long-context window mitigates this by providing the broader context required to identify these inversions and correctly assign temporal ordering between cause and effect. LangExtract classifies string alignment between source text and extracted triples into three categories: MATCH EXACT (verbatim extraction), MATCH FUZZY (semantic mapping with minor variation), and MATCH LESSER (partial mapping with significant deviation). Results by alignment level are detailed in Table II. Comparing MATCH EXACT and MATCH FUZZY, the relative occurrence of FPs is higher for MATCH FUZZY under both configurations, consistent with the expectation that triples lacking a precise verbatim match are more susceptible to hallucination. MATCH LESSER alignments produced no FPs in either configuration, likely due to the low frequency of this class and the model requiring high confidence to assign a partial mapping, thereby suppressing false generations.      

> TABLE II PROVENANCE INFORMATION RETRIEVAL METRICS OF LANG EXTRACT ON THE EUROCONTROL A-CDM M ANUAL

Short-Context Long-Context FP TP FP TP MATCH EXACT 4 138 3 149 MATCH FUZZY 14 273 12 276 MATCH LESSER 0 22 0 17 We evaluated provenance accuracy by defining a suc-cessful match as a triple that corresponds verbatim to or is directly inferable from the source text. LangEx-tract successfully mapped all extracted triples to their respective source sentences, providing a verifiable audit trail. This reliability stems from LangExtract’s native fu-sion of the LLM’s probabilistic outputs with deterministic string alignment methods, specifically text.find() and 

difflib.SequenceMatcher() , ensuring robust trace-ability across the entire KG. Empirical results demonstrate that LangExtract effectively bridges unstructured aviation documentation and structured, verifiable KGs. Contrary to theoretical expectations, long-context processing yielded superior performance, with the expanded context window reducing FNs caused by logical inversions in the source text. Robust provenance mapping further ensures that every extracted triple is traceable to its source, fulfilling a critical transparency requirement for deployment in safety-critical environments. V. F UTURE WORK 

Airport ground operations are subject to improvisations that frequently bypass standard procedural documentation, making full-scale analysis of efficiency impacts, safety risks, and stakeholder accountability a significant challenge. To address this, we propose a real-time operations verification framework that fuses multimodal data, including video analytics (see Fig. 6) and transponder signals, against canonical sequences defined in the KG, enabling automatic flagging of procedural deviations and initiation of recovery protocols. A critical chal-lenge in this context is entity resolution and data association [37, 38]; specifically, mapping low-level sensor detections to high-level KG entities. We intend to explore Named Entity Recognition techniques and Hidden Markov Models to bridge this semantic gap in future work. Beyond real-time monitoring, recurring deviations and novel operational patterns detected through transponder and audio-visual evidence can inform refinements to both documented procedures and the KG itself, creating a feedback loop where live operational data continuously improves the accuracy, completeness, and adaptability of the airport’s knowledge base, in direct alignment with the goals of the TAM initiative [9].  

> Fig. 6. Sample video analytics of Haneda Airport Operations

VI. C ONCLUSION 

This paper has presented a methodological framework for the semi-automated construction of domain-grounded knowledge graphs, addressing the persistent challenges of data silos and semantic inconsistency across airport opera-tions. At the core of this framework is a scaffolded sym-bolic fusion strategy, which uses expert-curated ontological structures to constrain and direct the generative capabilities of LLMs. Systematic evaluation of this approach via the LangExtract library demonstrated high-fidelity information extraction from unstructured technical corpora, with both long and short context configurations yielding precision, re-call, and F1-scores exceeding 95%. While segment-based inference optimizes attention density for entity recognition, document-level processing remains indispensable for capturing global procedural dependencies in workflows where logical flows are non-linear or inverted. The fusion of deterministic string alignment methods, specifically text.find() and 

difflib.SequenceMatcher() , with the probabilistic outputs of LangExtract provided complete source provenance across all extracted triples, reinforcing the traceability and reliability of the synthesized semantic data. The integration of these triples into a validated KG es-tablishes an interoperable, machine-readable foundation for the TAM initiative [9], enabling the automated generation of stakeholder-attributed swimlane diagrams that render op-erational processes both computationally interpretable and directly actionable. Unlike conversational LLM-based systems [30, 31], the proposed approach preserves explicit links to authoritative source text, providing a verifiable audit trail for each extracted relationship, a prerequisite for deploying LLM-derived knowledge in safety-critical aviation environments. Looking forward, the framework constitutes a scalable foundation for real-time operational verification through mul-timodal data fusion, wherein formal KG logic is combined with sensor inputs such as video analytics and transponder data to support proactive detection of procedural deviations. Collectively, this work advances the goals of modern airport management by reducing the opacity of generative AI outputs through constrained extraction and deterministic provenance, offering a practical and auditable pathway for integrating LLMs into complex, multi-stakeholder operational workflows. REFERENCES [1] Jinkyu Kim, Heonseok Ha, Byung-Gon Chun, Sungroh Yoon, and Sang K. Cha. “Collaborative analytics for data silos”. In: 2016 IEEE 32nd International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) . IEEE, May 2016, pp. 743–754. DOI : 10.1109/icde.2016.7498286. [2] Mohammad Ali Saberi, Hamid Mcheick, and Mehdi Adda. “From Data Silos to Health Records Without Borders: A Systematic Survey on Patient-Centered Data Interoperability”. In: Information 16.2 (Feb. 2025), p. 106. ISSN : 2078-2489. DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / info16020106. [3] John Fiset, Devasheesh P. Bhave, and Nilotpal Jha. “The Effects of Language-Related Misunderstanding at Work”. In: Journal of Man-agement 50.1 (July 2023), pp. 347–379. ISSN : 1557-1211. DOI : 10. 1177/01492063231181651. [4] Karl E. Weick. “The Vulnerable System: An Analysis of the Tenerife Air Disaster”. In: Journal of Management 16.3 (Sept. 1990), pp. 571– 593. ISSN : 1557-1211. DOI : 10.1177/014920639001600304. [5] Peter Buneman, Sanjeev Khanna, and Tan Wang-Chiew. “Why and Where: A Characterization of Data Provenance”. In: Database Theory — ICDT 2001 . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2001, pp. 316–330. ISBN :9783540445036. DOI : 10.1007/3-540-44503-x 20. [6] NASA. The NASA Air Traffic Management Ontology . Tech. rep. 2017. [7] Akshay Goel; Atilla Kiraly. Introducing LangExtract: A Gemini pow-ered information extraction library . July 2025. URL : https://developers. googleblog . com / introducing - langextract - a - gemini - powered -information-extraction-library/. [8] EUROCONTROL. Airport CDM Implementation . Tech. rep. 2017. [9] EUROCONTROL. “Total airport management: Driving the integration of airports into the ATM network by sharing information in a timely manner.” In: (2025). URL : https://www.eurocontrol.int/project/total-airport-management. [10] Yaakov Bar-Shalom. Tracking and data fusion. A handbook of al-gorithms . Ed. by Peter K. Willett and Xin Tian. Storrs, CT: YBS Publishing, 2011. 1235 pp. ISBN : 9780964831278. [11] Raghu Anantharangachar, Srinivasan Ramani, and S Rajagopalan. “Ontology guided information extraction from unstructured text”. In: 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1302.1335 (2013). [12] Saika Wong, Jianxiong Yang, Chunmo Zheng, and Xing Su. “Domain Ontology Development Methodology for Construction Contract”. In: 

International Symposium on Advancement of Construction Manage-ment and Real Estate . Springer. 2022, pp. 1566–1575. [13] Ali Riza Durmaz, Akhil Thomas, Lokesh Mishra, Rachana Niranjan Murthy, and Thomas Straub. “An ontology-based text mining dataset for extraction of process-structure-property entities”. In: Scientific data 

11.1 (2024), p. 1112. [14] Emna Amdouni, Abdelhadi Belfadel, Maxence Gagnant, Isabelle Re-nault, Samuel Kierszbaum, Jeremy Carrion, Matthieu Dussartre, and Sana Tmar. “Semi-Automatic Building of Ontologies from Unstruc-tured French Texts: Industrial Case Study: E. Amdouni et al.” In: Data Science and Engineering (2025), pp. 1–23. [15] Bowen Zhang and Harold Soh. Extract, Define, Canonicalize: An LLM-based Framework for Knowledge Graph Construction . 2024. DOI : 10. 48550/ARXIV.2404.03868. [16] Vamsi Krishna Kommineni, Birgitta K¨ onig-Ries, and Sheeba Samuel. 

From human experts to machines: An LLM supported approach to ontology and knowledge graph construction . 2024. DOI : 10 . 48550 / ARXIV.2403.08345. [17] Francesca Incitti, Andrea Salfinger, Lauro Snidaro, and Sri Challapalli. “Leveraging LLMs for Knowledge Engineering from Technical Manu-als: A Case Study in the Medical Prosthesis Manufacturing Domain”. In: 2024 27th International Conference on Information Fusion (FU-SION) . IEEE, July 2024, pp. 1–8. DOI : 10.23919/fusion59988.2024. 10706469. [18] Jeff Z. Pan et al. Large Language Models and Knowledge Graphs: Opportunities and Challenges . 2023. DOI : 10 . 48550 / ARXIV. 2308 . 06374. [19] Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F. Xu, Jun Araki, and Graham Neubig. How Can We Know What Language Models Know? 2019. DOI : 10.48550/ ARXIV.1911.12543. [20] Ziwei Ji et al. “Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Genera-tion”. In: (2022). DOI : 10.48550/ARXIV.2202.03629. [21] Xiang Chen, Ningyu Zhang, Xin Xie, Shumin Deng, Yunzhi Yao, Chuanqi Tan, Fei Huang, Luo Si, and Huajun Chen. “KnowPrompt: Knowledge-aware Prompt-tuning with Synergistic Optimization for Relation Extraction”. In: (2021). DOI : 10.48550/ARXIV.2104.07650. [22] Shengnan An, Weizhu Chen, Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, Zexiong Ma, and Nanning Zheng. “Make Your LLM Fully Utilize the Context”. In: 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 . NeurIPS 2024. Neural Information Processing Systems Foundation, Inc. (NeurIPS), 2024, pp. 62160–62188. DOI : 10.52202/079017-1986. [23] Hongye Jin, Xiaotian Han, Jingfeng Yang, Zhimeng Jiang, Zirui Liu, Chia-Yuan Chang, Huiyuan Chen, and Xia Hu. LLM Maybe LongLM: Self-Extend LLM Context Window Without Tuning . 2024. DOI : 10 . 48550/ARXIV.2401.01325. [24] Yiran Ding, Li Lyna Zhang, Chengruidong Zhang, Yuanyuan Xu, Ning Shang, Jiahang Xu, Fan Yang, and Mao Yang. LongRoPE: Extending LLM Context Window Beyond 2 Million Tokens . 2024. DOI : 10.48550/ ARXIV.2402.13753. [25] Chensen Huang, Guibo Zhu, Xuepeng Wang, Yifei Luo, Guojing Ge, Haoran Chen, Dong Yi, and Jinqiao Wang. Recurrent Context Compression: Efficiently Expanding the Context Window of LLM . 2024. 

> DOI

: 10.48550/ARXIV.2406.06110. [26] Josip Stjepandi´ c, Wim J. C. Verhagen, Harald Liese, and Pablo Bermell-Garcia. “Knowledge-Based Engineering”. In: Concurrent En-gineering in the 21st Century . Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 255–286. ISBN : 9783319137766. DOI : 10.1007/978-3-319-13776-6 10. [27] A.-S. Dadzie, R. Bhagdev, A. Chakravarthy, S. Chapman, J. Iria, V. Lanfranchi, J. Magalh˜ aes, D. Petrelli, and F. Ciravegna. “Applying semantic web technologies to knowledge sharing in aerospace engi-neering”. In: Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing 20.5 (June 2008), pp. 611–623. ISSN : 1572-8145. DOI : 10.1007/s10845-008-0141-1. [28] Gianfranco La Rocca and Michel J. L. van Tooren. “Knowledge-Based Engineering Approach to Support Aircraft Multidisciplinary Design and Optimization”. In: Journal of Aircraft 46.6 (Nov. 2009), pp. 1875– 1885. ISSN : 1533-3868. DOI : 10.2514/1.39028. [29] C.L. Emberey, N.R. Milton, J.P.T.J. Berends, M.J.L. Van Tooren, S.W.G. Van Der Elst, and B. Vermeulen. “Application of Knowledge Engineering Methodologies to Support Engineering Design Applica-tion Development in Aerospace”. In: 7th AIAA ATIO Conf, 2nd CEIAT Int’l Conf on Innov and Integr in Aero Sciences,17th LTA Systems Tech Conf; followed by 2nd TEOS Forum . American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Sept. 2007. DOI : 10.2514/6.2007-7708. [30] Liya Wang, Jason Chou, Alex Tien, Xin Zhou, and Diane Baumgartner. “AviationGPT: A large language model for the aviation domain”. In: 

AIAA AVIATION FORUM AND ASCEND 2024 . 2024, p. 4250. [31] Zhuorui Zhang, Shanshan Feng, Tiance Yang, Ruobing Huang, Hao Wang, Fu Wang, and Fan Li. “AviationCopilot: Building a reliable LLM-based Aviation Copilot inspired by human pilot training”. In: 

Advanced Engineering Informatics 69 (2026), p. 103806. [32] Yiwu Xu and Yun Chen. “Attention-based interactive multi-level feature fusion for named entity recognition”. In: Scientific Reports 15.1 (Jan. 2025). ISSN : 2045-2322. DOI : 10.1038/s41598-025-86718-0. [33] Karina Villela, Gleison Santos, L´ ılian Schnaider, Ana Regina Rocha, and Guilherme Horta Travassos. “The use of an enterprise ontology to support knowledge management in software development environ-ments”. In: Journal of the Brazilian Computer Society 11.2 (June 2005), pp. 45–59. ISSN : 1678-4804. DOI : 10.1007/bf03192375. [34] Zheng Yang Sng. “A Petri Net framework for the representation and analysis of aircraft turnaround operations”. MA thesis. MIT, 2019. [35] pdf24. PDF to Text . Feb. 2026. URL : https://tools.pdf24.org/en/pdf-to-txt. [36] Lamy Jean-Baptiste. Ontologies with Python. Programming OWL 2.0 Ontologies with Python and Owlready2 . Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2021. 344 pp. ISBN : 9781484265512. [37] Kurosh Madani, Cristiano Russo, and Antonio M. Rinaldi. “Merging Large Ontologies using BigData GraphDB”. In: 2019 IEEE Inter-national Conference on Big Data (Big Data) . IEEE, Dec. 2019, pp. 2383–2392. DOI : 10.1109/bigdata47090.2019.9005991. [38] Aidan Hogan, Antoine Zimmermann, J¨ urgen Umbrich, Axel Polleres, and Stefan Decker. “Scalable and distributed methods for entity matching, consolidation and disambiguation over linked data corpora”. In: Journal of Web Semantics 10 (Jan. 2012), pp. 76–110. ISSN : 1570-8268. DOI : 10.1016/j.websem.2011.11.002.