Title: Beyond Predefined Schemas: TRACE-KG for Context-Enriched Knowledge Graphs from Complex Documents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03496v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 00:19:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Beyond Predefined Schemas: TRACE-KG for Context-Enriched Knowledge Graphs from Complex Documents 

## Mohammad Sadeq Abolhasani 1,∗, Yang Ba 1, Yixuan He 2, and Rong Pan 11School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona State University 

> 2

## School of Mathematical and Natural Sciences, Arizona State University 

> 1

## mabolhas@asu.edu, yangba@asu.edu, Rong.Pan@asu.edu, 2Yixuan.He@asu.edu 

## Abstract 

Knowledge graph construction typically re-lies either on predefined ontologies or on schema-free extraction. Ontology-driven pipelines enforce consistent typing but re-quire costly schema design and maintenance, whereas schema-free methods often produce fragmented graphs with weak global organi-zation, especially in long technical documents with dense, context-dependent information. We propose TRACE-KG (Text-dRiven schemA for Context-Enriched Knowledge Graphs), a multimodal framework that jointly constructs a context-enriched knowledge graph and an induced schema without assuming a prede-fined ontology. TRACE-KG captures condi-tional relations through structured qualifiers and organizes entities and relations using a data-driven schema that serves as a reusable semantic scaffold while preserving full trace-ability to the source evidence. Experiments show that TRACE-KG produces structurally co-herent, traceable knowledge graphs and offers a practical alternative to both ontology-driven and schema-free construction pipelines. 

## 1 Introduction 

Knowledge graphs (KGs) are increasingly used as long-lived substrates for organizing, integrat-ing, and querying knowledge across documents, systems, and tasks (Hogan et al., 2021). Un-like raw text or traditional data models, graphs make structure explicit by representing entities and multi-relational links directly, supporting path-based queries and enabling gradual schema com-mitment : a graph can begin with a lightweight struc-ture and evolve as requirements change rather than requiring a fixed schema from the outset. At the same time, large language models (LLMs) (Naveed et al., 2025) have enabled powerful text-centric workflows such as retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020), which can answer many local questions directly from unstructured corpora. This raises a practical question: when is it worth transforming raw documents into a knowl-edge graph instead of relying on embeddings and text retrieval alone? 

Recent work suggests that explicit structured knowledge becomes particularly valuable when queries are global rather than local—when answers must integrate evidence across documents, enforce consistency, or remain inspectable and reusable across tasks and time (Khorashadizadeh et al., 2024; Bian, 2025). In such settings, a KG acts not merely as an index over text but as a persis-tent, queryable memory layer that complements LLMs. Yet constructing high-quality KGs directly from complex technical documents remains chal-lenging and largely unsolved (Xue and Zou, 2022; Zhong et al., 2023). A key reason is that useful KGs require more than extracting plausible triples: they require corpus-level organization , typically provided by a schema —a reusable vocabulary of entity and relation types that promotes normaliza-tion, reuse, and coherent connectivity across docu-ments (Hogan et al., 2021). However, most existing text-to-KG pipelines gravitate toward two unsatis-fying extremes. At one extreme, schema-free approaches extract entities and relations directly from text without en-forcing a shared type vocabulary or corpus-level consolidation (Mo et al., 2025; Mihindukulasooriya et al., 2023). While this often yields high local re-call , the resulting graphs fragment globally: the same entity may appear under multiple lexical variants, and semantically similar relations pro-liferate as near-duplicate predicates, in extreme cases producing relation vocabularies nearly as large as the edge set (Hofer et al., 2024; Bian, 2025; Mo et al., 2025). At the opposite extreme, ontology-driven pipelines map text into a prede-fined ontology with fixed entity and relation cat-egories (Mihindukulasooriya et al., 2023; Hofer et al., 2024). Although this enforces consistent typ-

> arXiv:2604.03496v1 [cs.AI] 3 Apr 2026

ing and semantics (Hogan et al., 2021), it assumes a suitable ontology exists and remains aligned with evolving terminology and document granular-ity. In practice, ontology construction and mainte-nance require substantial expert effort and often be-come a bottleneck (Hofer et al., 2024; Abolhasani and Pan, 2024). Moreover, restricting extraction to a fixed ontology can exclude information that does not map cleanly to predefined classes or re-lations, while relation vocabularies often remain comparatively coarse even when entity typing is enforced (Mo et al., 2025; Bai et al., 2025). These limitations are particularly acute in com-plex domain-specific corpora, where terminology is dense, lexical variation is high, external reference knowledge may be unavailable, and critical infor-mation is distributed across narrative text as well as figures, tables, diagrams, and equations (Sun et al., 2025; Bian, 2025). We therefore use a cor-pus of engineering and maintenance technical doc-uments as a motivating case study, highlighting key challenges for text-to-KG pipelines, includ-ing consolidation, schema induction, and context handling. A central difficulty in such settings is the interplay between lexical and semantic hetero-geneity (Hofer et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024): the same concept may appear under multiple surface forms, while similar expressions may denote dif-ferent concepts depending on context. Unresolved lexical variation fragments evidence across dupli-cate nodes, whereas over-merging semantically dis-tinct entities introduces incorrect relations (Wang et al., 2025a; Pons et al., 2024; Ding et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025b). Moreover, relations in tech-nical documents are often conditional—holding only under specific operating modes, temporal in-tervals, or constraints—so encoding them as un-conditional triples can produce oversimplified or contradictory graphs (Hogan et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2024). Capturing contex-tual qualifiers is therefore essential for faithful and inspectable knowledge representations. To address these challenges, we introduce 

TRACE-KG (Text-d Riven schem A for Context-

Enriched Knowledge Graphs), a multimodal, data-driven framework that constructs a context-enriched knowledge graph together with an in-duced schema over entities and relations. TRACE-KG bridges schema-free extraction and ontology-driven construction through iterative entity and re-lation resolution, canonicalizing relation seman-tics, and representing conditional relations through structured qualifiers while preserving links to sup-porting text spans for traceability. Our main contri-butions are as follows: • We introduce TRACE-KG , a multimodal, end-to-end framework for constructing 

context-enriched knowledge graphs from complex documents, with explicit mod-eling of condition-aware relations and provenance-preserving traceability. • We propose TRACE-Schema , a data-driven schema induction mechanism that organizes 

both entities and relations into reusable se-mantic scaffold , enabling corpus-level con-solidation without relying on a predefined on-tology. • We develop an evaluation framework that compares the induced schema with human-created ontologies, enabling systematic evalu-ation of schema coverage , granularity align-ment , and structural consistency .

## 2 Related Work 

Schema commitment in text-to-KG construction. 

A central distinction in LLM-based text-to-KG pipelines is when the schema is fixed. Ontology-driven approaches populate a predefined concep-tual model, improving normalization and seman-tic consistency when the ontology matches the corpus (Mihindukulasooriya et al., 2023; Ameri et al., 2026; Abolhasani and Pan, 2024; Tahsin et al., 2024), but they depend on costly ontology design and are brittle under evolving terminology and corpus-specific granularity (Hofer et al., 2024). At the other extreme, schema-free pipelines avoid predefined ontologies but often fragment entity and relation vocabularies. KGGen addresses this via post-hoc clustering and LLM-guided consolidation (Mo et al., 2025), and more recent work moves toward induced schema (Bai et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2025); however, such schemas remain partial, un-even across entities and relations, and weakly cou-pled to corpus-level consolidation. 

Local resolution, context, and reliability. An-other line of work focuses on improving local grounding and extraction quality. EntGPT and comparison-based prompting improve entity link-ing and matching by constraining LLM decisions (Ding et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025b), KG-assisted disambiguation exploits existing graph structure (Pons et al., 2024), and schema-conditioned ex-tractors such as GLiNER2 support structured ex-traction under user-provided label sets (Zaratiana et al., 2025). Separately, prior work shows that many scientific and technical relations are condi-tional rather than unconditional triples, motivating qualifier- or context-aware representations (Jiang et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2025), and robustness-oriented workflows such as KARMA (Lu and Wang, 2025). The core challenge is not extraction quality in isolation, but open-world co-construction of a graph and its schema: a reusable schema over both entities and relations must be induced from the corpus while entity identity, re-lation canonicalization, conditional context, and provenance remain jointly consistent across the entire graph. Extended discussion appears in Ap-pendix A. 

## 3 Preliminaries 

3.1 Corpus, multimodal elements, and text units 

Let D = {d1, . . . , d N } denote a corpus of docu-ments. Each document is represented as a unified text stream combining narrative text with textual-ized descriptions of non-text elements (e.g., figures, tables, and equations) obtained via multimodal doc-ument processing. All segments retain provenance metadata linking them to their original source re-gions. Documents are partitioned into sentence-preserving chunks. Each chunk c ∈ C is associated with an identifier id( c), textual content text( c), and provenance metadata prov( c).

3.2 Entities: mentions, resolved entities, and intrinsic properties Entity mentions. An entity mention is a span m

within a chunk c that refers to a real-world object or abstract concept. Let M denote the set of all entity mentions in the corpus. Each mention m ∈ M is associated with a span span( m) within its source chunk and a mapping chunk( m) ∈ C identifying the chunk in which the mention occurs. Mentions also store lightweight semantic attributes, including a name, a short description, and a broad type hint, together with a confidence score and supporting jus-tification excerpt(s) drawn from the chunk text. For a chunk c ∈ C, we define the mentions supported by c as M (c) = {m ∈ M : chunk (m) = c}.

Resolved entities. A resolved entity is a canon-ical graph-level object obtained by consolidating one or more mentions that refer to the same un-derlying concept or object. Let E denote the set of resolved entities. We define the mapping 

ResolvedEnt : M → E that assigns each mention to its corresponding resolved entity. For a chunk 

c ∈ C, the resolved entities supported by c are de-fined as E(c) = {ResolvedEnt( m) : m ∈ M (c)}

Intrinsic properties. Each resolved entity e ∈ E

may be associated with a set of intrinsic properties 

intr( e), consisting of typed key–value attributes in-herent to the entity (e.g., identifiers, codes, or phys-ical quantities). Intrinsic properties are modeled as node-level annotations rather than independent graph entities. 

3.3 Relations: instances, canonical relations, and qualifiers Relation instances. Let R denote the set of re-lation instances. A relation instance r ∈ R is a directed statement grounded in a source chunk: 

r = ( es, ℓ raw , e t, Q, π, s ) where es, e t ∈ E are the source and target entities, ℓraw is the surface relation label as expressed in the document, Q is a set of contextual qualifier annotations, π denotes provenance metadata (e.g., supporting chunk iden-tifiers and justification span(s)), and s ∈ [0 , 1] is a confidence score. Multiple relation instances may connect the same ordered entity pair, so the result-ing structure forms a directed multigraph. 

Canonical relation labels. Multiple relation in-stances may express the same underlying interac-tion using different surface forms. Each relation instance is therefore assigned a canonical rela-tion label via the mapping CanonicalRel : R →

RelCan , where RelCan denotes the set of induced canonical relation labels. Canonicalization normal-izes predicate semantics while preserving each rela-tion instance together with its endpoints, qualifiers, confidence, and provenance. 

Qualifiers and context-enriched relations. Re-lation instances often hold only under specific con-textual conditions (e.g., temporal, spatial, oper-ational, conditional, uncertainty, or causal con-straints). To preserve this information, each rela-tion instance carries the qualifier set Q, represented as typed key–value annotations attached to the in-stance. Qualifiers capture these conditions without introducing additional nodes or edges or altering graph topology. 3.4 Data-driven schema over entities and relations 

To support corpus-level organization beyond lo-cal extractions, we define linked schema hierar-chies over entities and relations. At the entity level, resolved entities are organized into entity classes and broader class groups. At the relation level, canonical relation labels are organized into relation classes and relation class groups. 

Entity schema. Let EntCls denote the set of induced entity classes and EntClsGroup denote broader class groups. Each resolved entity e ∈ E

is associated with a single entity class and one entity class group via τent : E → EntCls and 

γent : EntCls → EntClsGroup .

Relation schema. Let RelCls denote induced re-lation classes and RelClsGroup denote broader relation class groups. Canonical relation la-bels in RelCan are associated with a re-lation class and a relation class group via 

τrel : RelCan → RelCls and γrel :

RelCls → RelClsGroup . Together these define a schema S = (EntCls , EntClsGroup , RelCls ,

RelClsGroup , τ ent , γ ent , τ rel , γ rel ).

3.5 Context-enriched knowledge graph 

A context-enriched knowledge graph is defined as G = (E, R, S ), where E is the set of re-solved entities, R is the set of relation instances (directed edges between entities), and S is the in-duced schema over entities and relations. Entities and relation instances carry structured annotations capturing semantic attributes, intrinsic properties (for entities), contextual qualifiers and canonical relation labels (for relations), schema as-signments, confidence estimates, explanatory meta-data (e.g., justification excerpts), and provenance information. Intrinsic properties and qualifiers are modeled as annotations attached to nodes and edges rather than as separate graph elements. Prove-nance links associate each entity and relation in-stance with supporting chunks, enabling auditabil-ity against the source evidence. 

## 4 Methodology 

Given a corpus D, TRACE-KG constructs a context-enriched knowledge graph G = ( E, R, S )

grounded in document evidence and organized through an induced schema refined during entity and relation resolution. The pipeline follows a consistent pattern: High-recall recognition (local extraction): extract chunk-level candidates while deferring global normalization; Semantic neigh-borhood formation (embedding + clustering): 

embed multi-field representations and cluster them into semantic neighborhoods; and Constrained resolution (auditable actions): the LLM selects structured actions (via function calling) while de-terministic validators execute and log edits. An overview of the workflow is shown in Figure 1, and implementation details are in Appendix B. 

4.1 Multimodal ingestion, and chunking 

Documents may contain narrative text together with non-text elements such as figures, tables, di-agrams, and equations. Non-text regions are de-tected and textualized using a pretrained vision model that produces structured textual descriptions integrated into the document stream, while preserv-ing provenance metadata (e.g., page and region identifiers). The resulting text stream is segmented into sentence-preserving chunks c ∈ C.

4.2 Entity layer: recognition and iterative resolution Entity recognition (EntRec). EntRec operates at the chunk level. For each focus chunk c, the extrac-tor receives text( c) together with a short window of preceding chunks for disambiguation, but ex-tracts mentions only from the focus chunk. Each mention includes a name, a short description, an optional type hint, a confidence score, and justifica-tion excerpt(s) grounded in text( c). When explic-itly stated, intrinsic property candidates are also emitted as typed key–value attributes with support-ing evidence. 

Entity resolution (EntRes) via constrained ac-tion selection. Mentions are embedded as multi-field representations combining lexical, descrip-tive, type, and evidence signals, and clustered with HDBSCAN into candidate co-reference neighbor-hoods (oversized clusters are locally subclustered). Within each neighborhood, the LLM does not mod-ify the graph directly. Instead, it outputs a JSON array of auditable actions over the provided entity identifiers; these actions are validated and executed by deterministic pipeline code, which records all edits. The available actions include M ERGE ENTI - 

> TIES

(assign a canonical identity to multiple men-tions) and M ODIFY ENTITY (clarify an entity to prevent incorrect merges). EntRes proceeds iter-Figure 1: TRACE-KG pipeline. Multimodal documents are textualized to integrate non-text elements with narrative text (1) and segmented into chunks (2). Chunks are processed sequentially to extract entity mentions (3, EntRec) and consolidate them into resolved entities (4, EntRes). Resolved entities are grouped into entity classes (5, EntClsRec) and refined into a hierarchy of classes and class groups (6, EntClsRes). Given the resolved entities in each chunk, relation instances with qualifiers are extracted (7, RelRec) and canonicalized while inducing a relation schema (8, RelRes). Resolution stages (4, 6, 8) combine clustering with LLM-guided selection of available functions and deterministic execution. The outputs are a traceable context-enriched knowledge graph (9) and an induced hierarchical schema over entities and relations (10). 

atively: after applying actions, mention-to-entity assignments are updated, multi-field representa-tions are refreshed, and clustering is repeated until merges plateau or the maximum iteration budget is reached (Appendix B). 

4.3 Entity schema induction: classes and class groups (TRACE-Schema) Entity class recognition (EntClsRec). Ent-ClsRec operates over resolved entities E. Each entity is embedded using a class-oriented repre-sentation derived from its canonical name and de-scription, intrinsic properties, broad type hints, and representative supporting text. The resulting rep-resentations are clustered to form neighborhoods of semantically related entities. For each neighbor-hood, the LLM proposes one or more candidate entity classes (class label, description, and mem-ber IDs), corresponding to elements of EntCls and allowing multiple classes per neighborhood when needed. To reduce unassigned or noisy cases, class recognition runs iteratively with reclustering of re-maining entities, followed by a single-entity fall-back pass to ensure coverage. 

Entity class resolution (EntClsRes). EntClsRes consolidates candidate classes into a coherent hier-archy by repeatedly embedding and clustering class candidates and applying constrained, auditable ac-tions. The LLM proposes structured actions (via function calling), while deterministic validators ex-ecute them and record all edits. These actions in-clude M ERGE CLASSES (merge duplicate classes), SPLIT CLASS (split overloaded classes), C REATE -CLASS (create missing classes), R EASSIGN ENTI - 

> TIES

(move entities across classes), and M ODI -

> FY

CLASS (revise class metadata, including class-group assignment). The process runs for multiple refinement rounds and terminates when structural changes plateau. The final result assigns each en-tity to a single entity class and class group, forming the hierarchy EntClsGroup → EntCls → E.

4.4 Relation layer: chunk-centric recognition with qualifiers Relation recognition (RelRec). RelRec operates at the chunk level to enforce locality. For each chunk c, the model receives text( c) together with the resolved entities of that chunk, E(c), and may output relations only among those entities when supported by explicit evidence in the chunk. Each extracted relation instance includes a raw predicate label, an instance description, subject and object entity identifiers, a confidence score, justification evidence, and qualifier annotations that capture con-textual constraints (e.g., temporal, spatial, opera-tional, or conditional signals). Qualifiers preserve 

when and under what conditions a relation holds without introducing additional nodes or edges. 

4.5 Relation canonicalization and relation schema induction (TRACE-Schema) 

Relation processing follows the same recognition, clustering, and resolution structure as the entity layer, but differs in its impact on graph topology. Entity resolution merges multiple mentions into a single node, collapsing duplicates. In contrast, rela-tion instances are preserved as grounded evidence and are not removed based solely on semantic sim-ilarity, since each connects a specific ordered pair of entities. Normalization therefore assigns canoni-cal relation labels and schema annotations to each instance rather than deleting edges, preserving the graph as a directed multigraph. 

Relation resolution and schema induction (Rel-Res). Relation instances are embedded as multi-field representations combining predicate text, in-stance descriptions, endpoint context (subject/ob-ject names and entity-schema metadata), quali-fier information, and optional coarse type hints. These are clustered into neighborhoods of seman-tically related relations. Within each neighbor-hood, the LLM selects structured actions using the constrained interface from the entity layer, includ-ing S ET CANONICAL REL , S ET REL CLS , S ET REL -CLS GROUP , M ODIFY REL SCHEMA , A DD REL RE-

> MARK

, and M ERGE RELATIONS , which determin-istic validators then apply and log. The M ERG -

> E

RELATIONS action is permitted only when two instances connect the same entity pair and express equivalent semantics. RelRes proceeds iteratively: after each round, canonical labels and schema as-signments are updated, neighborhoods are recom-puted, and refinement stops once structural edits plateau or a predefined budget is reached. 

4.6 Graph and schema assembly, traceability, and reliability controls 

The final stage assembles the knowledge graph 

G = ( E, R, S ). Resolved entities are exported as nodes annotated with intrinsic properties, entity-class and class-group assignments, confidence scores, explanatory metadata (e.g., justification excerpts and remarks by LLM), and aggregated provenance, while relation instances are exported as directed edges annotated with raw and canonical predicate labels, relation-class and class-group as-signments, qualifier dictionaries, confidence scores, explanatory metadata, and provenance. Trace-ability is preserved throughout the pipeline: ev-ery node and edge maintains explicit links to sup-porting chunk identifiers, and all resolution edits are recorded as structured, auditable actions. To-gether, chunk-local extraction, restricted candidate sets, constrained action interfaces, and provenance-carrying representations provide safeguards against hallucinated graph structure while maintaining broad coverage in long multimodal documents. 

## 5 Experiment & Analysis 

TRACE-KG is evaluated on (i) its ability to con-struct context-enriched knowledge graphs that sup-port reliable graph-based retrieval and reasoning, and (ii) its ability to induce a reusable schema. Im-plementation details appear in the appendix, and an anonymized codebase with full experiment scripts is available at https://anonymous.4open. science/r/TRACE-KG .

5.1 Experiment 1: Knowledge Retention on MINE-1 

To assess factual knowledge retention under graph-based retrieval, we adopt the MINE-1 benchmark (Mo et al., 2025). Given a source article and a set of derived factual statements, the task is to deter-mine whether each statement can be supported by a retrieved subgraph of the constructed KG. We compare five pipelines on identical benchmark in-stances: TRACE-KG (ours), KGGen (Mo et al., 2025), GraphRAG (Larson and Truitt, 2024), Ope-nIE (Angeli et al., 2015), and AutoSchemaKG (Bai et al., 2025). 

Protocol (retrieval and strict judging). We fol-low the retrieval-and-judge procedure of MINE-1 (Mo et al., 2025). Each factual statement is embed-ded and matched to KG entities; the top-k entities are retrieved, expanded within a fixed hop budget to form an induced subgraph, and evaluated by a strict LLM judge. The judge determines whether the statement is supported using only the retrieved subgraph (binary decision; no external knowledge; no inferred edges). To ensure comparability, we use a fixed judge configuration across all methods, along with identical retrieval hyperparameters and embedding models. 

Beyond raw retrieval accuracy. The standard MINE-1 score (Ret.Acc) measures whether facts can be supported from retrieved subgraphs. How-ever, high Ret.Acc can arise from undesirable ar-tifacts, such as copying long text spans into entity strings or retrieving fragments from globally dis-connected graphs. To better capture graph quality, we complement Ret.Acc with structural and rep-resentational metrics reflecting connectivity, com-pression, and information leakage. We report three composite metrics: RWA (Reachability-Weighted Accuracy), EGU (Effective Graph Utilization), and 

SCI (Structural Coherence Index): 

RWA = Ret.Acc × Conn. (1) 

EGU = Ret.Acc × Conn. × (1 − Leak% ) (2) 

SCI = AvgDeg × Clust. × Conn. (3) RWA adjusts retrieval accuracy by graph connectiv-ity; EGU further penalizes lexical leakage; and SCI measures structural quality independently of re-trieval accuracy. Detailed definitions are provided in Appendix C.0.1. 

Results. Table 1 shows that Ret.Acc alone yields an incomplete ranking. Although AutoSchemaKG achieves the highest Ret.Acc (95.1%), it also ex-hibits high leakage (36.5%) and a large TriCR (3.599), indicating that much of the retained ev-idence remains close to the source text rather than compactly encoded in the graph. TRACE-KG, by contrast, maintains high Ret.Acc (90.2%) while achieving low leakage (1.3%), a TriCR close to 1 (0.956), and strong connectivity (88.5%), resulting in the best EGU, RWA, SCI, and AvgRank. These results show that TRACE-KG balances retrieval accuracy with structural coherence, rather than re-lying on lexical overlap. See Appendix C.0.1 for additional diagnostics and baseline analysis. Fig-ure 2 visualizes the effects of discounting leakage and structural fragmentation. 

5.2 Experiment 2: Ontology-Held-Out Schema Evaluation Goal and setting. We evaluate TRACE-KG’s ability to induce a reusable schema directly from text using a novel ontology-held-out protocol. TRACE-KG operates solely on the input corpus and induces a hierarchical schema of entity and relation types as part of extraction and resolution, without access to any predefined ontology. A cu-rated reference ontology is introduced only after schema induction for post hoc mapping and eval-uation, ensuring that the induced schema is as-sessed against an independent, human-designed conceptual model. Details are provided in Ap-pendix C.0.2. 

Why this dataset. This setting requires (i) human-curated ontologies as held-out ground truth and (ii) domain-specific text from which schemas must be induced. We therefore use the DBpedia-WebNLG domain ontologies and sentence splits distributed by Text2KGBench and OSKGC (Mi-hindukulasooriya et al., 2023; Wang and Iwaihara, 2025). The dataset spans 19 domains with diverse entity and relation vocabularies, enabling cross-domain evaluation of schema induction. Inputs consist of disjoint sentences rather than full docu-ments; thus, document-level structural cues (e.g., titles, sections) are absent, and schema must be inferred solely from local linguistic evidence. 

Protocol. For each domain, we run TRACE-KG on the dataset-provided train sentences to in-duce the TRACE schema . The resulting schema forms hierarchical structures for both entities and relations: entity types (entity classes → class groups → coarser types) and relation types (canon-ical relations → relation classes → relation class groups). The induced schema is then aligned to the held-out reference ontology and evaluated un-der three evaluation scopes defined by gold triples: 

Source (train gold triples), Held-out (test 

gold triples), and Combined (all gold triples). Alignment judgements are produced by an LLM verifier, with targeted human auditing of low-confidence cases. 

Schema mapping and verification. To align the induced TRACE schema with the held-out refer-ence ontology, we use a retrieve–verify procedure. For each reference anchor (concept or relation), we retrieve the top-K candidate schema elements from TRACE and evaluate them using an LLM judge, which assigns one of E QUIVALENT , N AR -

> ROWER

, B ROADER , or U NRELATED . EQUIVA - 

> LENT

is treated as exact recovery and N ARROWER 

as a compatible refinement. For relations, align-ment is evaluated in a direction-relaxed manner. 

Active anchors and metrics. For each evalua-tion scope (Source, Held-out, Combined), we eval-Table 1: Knowledge retention results on MINE-1.                                     

> Method Ret.Acc EGU ↑RWA ↑SCI ↑Leak ↓TriCR →1Conn. ↑AvgRank ↓
> TRACE-KG 90.2% 78.5% 79.6% 0.270 1.3% 0.956 88.5% 1.44
> GraphRAG 48.4% 45.1% 45.1% 0.146 0.0% 0.394 91.5% 2.67 AutoSchemaKG 95.1% 37.3% 58.7% 0.047 36.5% 3.599 61.5% 3.33 OpenIE 56.0% 40.5% 41.5% 0.024 2.3% 3.201 74.0% 3.56 KGGen 63.6% 30.1% 30.1% 0.005 0.0% 0.494 46.1% 4.00

Figure 2: Failure modes behind raw retrieval accuracy on MINE-1. Left: Ret.Acc retained after discounting by connectivity and leakage. Middle: deviation of TriCR from the ideal value 1. Right: Ret.Acc versus EGU. 

uate only active reference anchors, defined as ontol-ogy relations appearing in the gold triples together with their domain and range concepts. Anchors are frequency-weighted according to their occurrence in the corresponding split. We report coverage (Ex-act and Compatible), frequency-weighted MRR@5, and domain/range consistency (D/R). 

Results and discussion. Table 2 reports ontology-held-out schema evaluation macro-averaged over 19 domains. Concept alignment is strong across all scopes, with near-saturated compatible coverage (97–99%). Lower exact recovery ( ≈50%) reflects frequent N ARROWER 

refinements rather than failure to recover the underlying concept. Relation alignment is more challenging but remains robust, reaching 84.8% compatible coverage under the held-out setting, with high retrieval quality (MRR@5 = 0.883 for concepts and 0.795 for relations). Aligned relations also remain structurally coherent, with do-main/range consistency of 82.7% under Held-out weighting. Overall, these results demonstrate that TRACE-KG induces a reusable schema directly from text while remaining semantically compatible with a reference ontology. 

## 6 Conclusion 

By combining high-recall extraction, clustering-

Table 2: Ontology-held-out schema evaluation on DBpedia-WebNLG (19 domains).                                   

> Metric Source Held-out Combined
> Active reference anchors (avg. per ontology)
> Concepts 11.2 12.8 14.3 Relations 28.4 31.1 42.7
> Concept alignment
> Coverage (Compat) 99.1% 97.2% 98.3% Coverage (Exact) 50.2% 51.2% 50.2% Coverage (Narrower) 48.9% 46.0% 48.1% MRR@5 0.889 0.877 0.883
> Relation alignment
> Coverage (Compat) 92.4% 84.8% 89.9% Coverage (Exact) 61.8% 49.7% 56.8% Coverage (Narrower) 30.6% 35.1% 33.1% MRR@5 0.885 0.694 0.795
> Domain/range consistency
> D/R (L1–L3) 91.0% 82.7% 88.1%

based consolidation, and constrained LLM-guided resolution, TRACE-KG produces structurally co-herent and traceable graphs from multimodal tech-nical documents. Across complementary evalua-tions, TRACE-KG consistently achieves strong per-formance while avoiding common failure modes such as lexical leakage and structural fragmenta-tion, demonstrating clear advantages over existing approaches. These results show that integrating schema induction directly into KG construction provides a scalable foundation for retrieval, reason-ing, and auditing over large technical documents. 7 Limitations and Future Work 

The quality of schema induction and resolution de-pends on the stability of semantic neighborhoods formed through embedding and clustering. While iterative refinement mitigates early noise, errors in neighborhood formation can affect downstream canonicalization, particularly for low-frequency or semantically ambiguous entities and relations. Fu-ture work can explore more robust neighborhood formation, stability-aware refinement, and alterna-tive clustering strategies. Although TRACE-KG enforces structured decision-making through constrained action inter-faces and deterministic execution, the selection of actions remains dependent on LLM outputs. As a result, performance is influenced by the capabilities and consistency of the underlying model, especially in complex or ambiguous cases. Future work in-cludes developing more model-agnostic decision strategies, improving validation and repair mecha-nisms, and exploring efficient model cascades. TRACE-KG is designed to be domain-agnostic, but schema quality can benefit from domain-specific linguistic patterns and terminology. Incor-porating domain-adaptive or fine-tuned language models, as well as leveraging domain-specific cor-pora during schema induction, is a promising di-rection for improving performance in specialized settings. 

## References 

Mohammad Sadeq Abolhasani and Rong Pan. 2024. Leveraging llm for automated ontology extraction and knowledge graph generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.00608 .Farhad Ameri, Mohammad Sadeq Abolhasani, and Yun-qing Li. 2026. From tabular maintenance work orders to ontology-guided knowledge graph via llm: Prior-itizing content over structure. Available at SSRN 6017381 .Gabor Angeli, Melvin Jose Johnson Premkumar, and Christopher D Manning. 2015. Leveraging linguistic structure for open domain information extraction. In 

Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 344–354. Jiaxin Bai, Wei Fan, Qi Hu, Qing Zong, Chun-yang Li, Hong Ting Tsang, Hongyu Luo, Yauwai Yim, Haoyu Huang, Xiao Zhou, and 1 others. 2025. Autoschemakg: Autonomous knowledge graph construction through dynamic schema in-duction from web-scale corpora. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23628 .Haonan Bian. 2025. Llm-empowered knowledge graph construction: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.20345 .Shengyuan Chen, Qinggang Zhang, Junnan Dong, Wen Hua, Qing Li, and Xiao Huang. 2024. Entity align-ment with noisy annotations from large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:15097–15120. Yifan Ding, Amrit Poudel, Qingkai Zeng, Tim Weninger, Balaji Veeramani, and Sanmitra Bhat-tacharya. 2024. Entgpt: Entity linking with gen-erative large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06738 .Jérôme Euzenat, M Ehrig, and RG Castro. 2005. To-wards a methodology for evaluating alignment and matching algorithms. Technical Report, Ontology Alignment Evaluation Initiative (OAEI) .Marvin Hofer, Daniel Obraczka, Alieh Saeedi, Hanna Köpcke, and Erhard Rahm. 2024. Construction of knowledge graphs: Current state and challenges. In-formation , 15(8):509. Aidan Hogan, Eva Blomqvist, Michael Cochez, Clau-dia d’Amato, Gerard De Melo, Claudio Gutierrez, Sabrina Kirrane, José Emilio Labra Gayo, Roberto Navigli, Sebastian Neumaier, and 1 others. 2021. Knowledge graphs. ACM Computing Surveys (Csur) ,54(4):1–37. Tianwen Jiang, Tong Zhao, Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Nitesh V Chawla, and Meng Jiang. 2019. The role of" condition" a novel scientific knowledge graph representation and construction model. In Proceed-ings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Confer-ence on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , pages 1634–1642. Hanieh Khorashadizadeh, Fatima Zahra Amara, Morteza Ezzabady, Frédéric Ieng, Sanju Tiwari, Nan-dana Mihindukulasooriya, Jinghua Groppe, Soror Sahri, Farah Benamara, and Sven Groppe. 2024. Re-search trends for the interplay between large lan-guage models and knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08223 .Jonathan Larson and Steven Truitt. 2024. Graphrag: Unlocking llm discovery on narrative private data. 

Microsoft Research Blog .Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, and 1 others. 2020. Retrieval-augmented gen-eration for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:9459– 9474. Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization branches out , pages 74–81. Yuxing Lu and Jinzhuo Wang. 2025. Karma: Leverag-ing multi-agent llms for automated knowledge graph enrichment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06472 .Nandana Mihindukulasooriya, Sanju Tiwari, Carlos F Enguix, and Kusum Lata. 2023. Text2kgbench: A benchmark for ontology-driven knowledge graph gen-eration from text. In International semantic web conference , pages 247–265. Springer. Belinda Mo, Kyssen Yu, Joshua Kazdan, Joan Cabezas, Proud Mpala, Lisa Yu, Chris Cundy, Charilaos Kanat-soulis, and Sanmi Koyejo. 2025. Kggen: Extracting knowledge graphs from plain text with language mod-els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09956 .Humza Naveed, Asad Ullah Khan, Shi Qiu, Muhammad Saqib, Saeed Anwar, Muhammad Usman, Naveed Akhtar, Nick Barnes, and Ajmal Mian. 2025. A com-prehensive overview of large language models. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology ,16(5):1–72. Mark E. J. Newman. 2010. Networks: An Introduction .Oxford University Press. Mark EJ Newman. 2003. The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM review , 45(2):167–256. Gerard Pons, Besim Bilalli, and Anna Queralt. 2024. Knowledge graphs for enhancing large language mod-els in entity disambiguation. In International Seman-tic Web Conference , pages 162–179. Springer. Ying Qin, Hui Yang, Liu Cui, Yuan Zhang, Gefei Feng, Yina Qiao, and Yuejing Yao. 2025. Semantic-aware fusion of mineral exploration knowledge streams to-wards dynamic geological knowledge graphs. Miner-als , 15(12):1257. Claude Elwood Shannon. 1948. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell system technical journal ,27(3):379–423. Jiaqi Sun, Shiyou Qian, Zhangchi Han, Wei Li, Zelin Qian, Dingyu Yang, Jian Cao, and Guangtao Xue. 2025. Lkd-kgc: Domain-specific kg construction via llm-driven knowledge dependency parsing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.24163 .Renita Tahsin, Yunqing Li, Mohammad Sadeq Abol-hasani, and Farhad Ameri. 2024. Generation of se-mantic knowledge graphs from maintenance work orders data. J. Maintenance Engineering , 11(2):45– 60. Cornelius Joost Van Rijsbergen. 1979. Information retrieval. 2nd. newton, ma. Dali Wang and Mizuho Iwaihara. 2025. Oskgc: A benchmark for ontology schema-based knowledge graph construction from text. In CEUR Workshop Proceedings , volume 4041. CEUR-WS. Fang Wang, Zhengwei Tao, Ming Wang, Minghao Hu, and Xiaoying Bai. 2025a. AELC: Adaptive entity linking with LLM-driven contextualization. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 4313–4327, Suzhou, China. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Tianshu Wang, Xiaoyang Chen, Hongyu Lin, Xuanang Chen, Xianpei Han, Le Sun, Hao Wang, and Zhenyu Zeng. 2025b. Match, compare, or select? an investi-gation of large language models for entity matching. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 96–109. Duncan J Watts and Steven H Strogatz. 1998. Col-lective dynamics of ‘small-world’networks. nature ,393(6684):440–442. Chengjin Xu, Muzhi Li, Cehao Yang, Xuhui Jiang, Lum-ingyuan Tang, Yiyan Qi, and Jian Guo. 2024. Con-text graph. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11160 .Bingcong Xue and Lei Zou. 2022. Knowledge graph quality management: A comprehensive survey. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering ,35(5):4969–4988. Urchade Zaratiana, Gil Pasternak, Oliver Boyd, George Hurn-Maloney, and Ash Lewis. 2025. Gliner2: Schema-driven multi-task learning for structured in-formation extraction. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 130–140. Lingfeng Zhong, Jia Wu, Qian Li, Hao Peng, and Xin-dong Wu. 2023. A comprehensive survey on auto-matic knowledge graph construction. ACM Comput-ing Surveys , 56(4):1–62. A Extended Related Work 

Ontology-driven construction and ontology pop-ulation. A prominent direction treats the schema as an explicit input , framing text-to-KG construc-tion as ontology population. TEXT 2KGB ENCH 

evaluates this setting by measuring whether gener-ated triples remain faithful to text while conform-ing to ontology constraints, showing that errors persist even when the target schema is fixed (Mi-hindukulasooriya et al., 2023). In industrial and maintenance settings, Ameri et al. operationalize ontology-guided construction using a curated the-saurus and work-order ontology to map noisy de-scriptions into RDF representations aligned with domain concepts (Ameri et al., 2026). OntoKGen similarly employs LLMs in an interactive workflow to extract and refine an ontology from technical documents before generating a schema-consistent KG (Abolhasani and Pan, 2024). While these ap-proaches improve normalization through schema alignment, they remain sensitive to ontology de-sign, costly to maintain over time, and brittle under evolving terminology and corpus-specific granular-ity (Hofer et al., 2024). 

Schema-free extraction and post-hoc consol-idation. A complementary direction performs schema-free extraction, producing entities and re-lations directly from text. Such approaches often yield fragmented vocabularies at corpus scale: se-mantically similar relations appear under many sur-face predicates, and entities are duplicated across abbreviations and near-synonyms. KGGen high-lights this issue, showing that naive extraction can produce relation vocabularies nearly as large as the edge set, and addresses it through embedding-based clustering with LLM-guided consolidation of entities and relations (Mo et al., 2025). While this improves representational reuse, it does not induce 

schema connectivity : in schema-free graphs, ob-jects are related primarily through extracted edges, whereas type- or class-level structure could connect entities (and relations) via shared membership even in the absence of direct edges. 

Inducing schema from text. To move beyond post-hoc label normalization, recent approaches treat schema as an output of construction. Au-toSchemaKG induces abstract concepts for enti-ties and relations and uses these assignments as a learned schema layer (Bai et al., 2025). This enables data-driven organization without a prede-fined ontology, but the resulting schema elements can remain verbose and heterogeneous, and their coupling with robust corpus-level identity resolu-tion remains limited. LKD-KGC targets domain-specific repositories by modeling cross-document dependencies: it orders documents, incorporates re-trieved context during summarization, and induces an entity schema (type names and definitions) to guide extraction (Sun et al., 2025). While this lever-ages repository structure, the resulting organiza-tion is often uneven across entities and relations, and extracted predicates and nodes remain close to natural-language expressions, limiting stable and reusable schema formation across long corpora. 

Entity resolution, entity matching, and schema-aware IE. Mention-level ambiguity remains a central bottleneck in KG construction. EntGPT frames entity linking as a structured generative workflow based on explicit candidate sets, showing that grounding decisions can materially improve downstream reasoning (Ding et al., 2024). Wang et al. compare LLM prompting strategies for en-tity matching and show that structured comparison and selection outperform naive generation, high-lighting the importance of controlling the decision process (Wang et al., 2025b). KG-assisted entity disambiguation similarly leverages existing graph structure to constrain candidate spaces and provide structured evidence (Pons et al., 2024). At the ex-traction layer, schema-driven IE models such as GLiNER2 enable flexible extraction under user-specified label sets, demonstrating the practicality of schema-conditioned structured extraction (Zara-tiana et al., 2025). While these approaches improve grounding and extraction, they typically rely on external reference structures (KBs or predefined schemas) and are evaluated in isolation, rather than in end-to-end, corpus-scale settings where schema must be induced and entities and relations must be jointly canonicalized. 

Context and conditions in knowledge represen-tations. In scientific and technical domains, un-conditional triples are often insufficient, as facts may hold only under specific conditions. Jiang et al. explicitly model conditions to mitigate contradic-tions when aggregating scientific statements across incompatible contexts (Jiang et al., 2019). Context Graph extends this perspective by attaching struc-tured contextual attributes (e.g., provenance, time, location, quantitative qualifiers) to relations and shows that treating context as first-class improves downstream reasoning (Xu et al., 2024). In applied domains such as mineral exploration, dynamic KGs similarly emphasize fusing heterogeneous evidence streams where interpretation depends on local con-textual cues (Qin et al., 2025). Despite these ad-vances, many construction pipelines still default to flat triples or weak qualifier structures, limiting reasoning about when and under what assumptions 

a relation holds. 

Reliability, verification, provenance, and multi-modal evidence. LLM-based extraction is vul-nerable to hallucinations and structural inconsisten-cies, motivating constrained workflows and explicit verification stages. KARMA exemplifies this direc-tion by coordinating specialized LLM agents for extraction, schema alignment, and conflict resolu-tion when extending an existing KG (Lu and Wang, 2025). Benchmarks such as T EXT 2KGB ENCH ex-pose faithfulness and conformance failures even un-der schema constraints (Mihindukulasooriya et al., 2023), while KGGen emphasizes retention and reuse under consolidation (Mo et al., 2025). How-ever, many pipelines do not preserve fine-grained provenance as a first-class artifact—i.e., explicit links from each node or edge to supporting spans and structured elements such as tables, figures, and equations—and explicit confidence signals for pri-oritized, ad hoc review remain poorly standardized. These limitations are particularly pronounced in technical corpora, where critical information is dis-tributed across narrative text and semi-structured or diagrammatic content. Collectively, prior work advances key compo-nents of text-to-KG construction—ontology align-ment, vocabulary consolidation, schema induc-tion, entity matching, contextual modeling, and reliability-oriented orchestration. However, these components are largely developed in isolation and under incompatible assumptions about schema commitment, grounding, and evidence structure. The central gap is the open-world setting in which the schema itself must be induced from the cor-pus while entity identity, relation normalization, conditional context, and provenance remain jointly consistent across the entire construction process. TRACE-KG addresses this setting by integrating schema induction, resolution, contextualization, and traceability within a unified pipeline. 

## B Extended Methodology Details 

This appendix provides implementation-level de-tails supporting reproducibility and auditing that are omitted from the main paper, including multi-field representation construction, clustering and subclustering strategies, constrained action inter-faces (“function calling”), and iteration and stop-ping criteria. It also describes qualifier-aware rela-tion merging and the traceability artifacts produced by the pipeline. 

B.1 Intermediate artifacts and traceability 

TRACE-KG persists intermediate JSONL artifacts at each stage to preserve traceability and enable inspection: chunk records (id, text, provenance); mention-level entity extractions; resolved entities with aggregated evidence and intrinsic properties; candidate and resolved entity classes with class groups; raw relation instances with qualifiers and evidence; and resolved relations with canonical la-bels and schema annotations. Each resolution stage additionally stores the exact prompt provided to the LLM, the raw LLM output for each processed cluster, and a structured action log. 

B.2 Multi-field representations and embedding 

Each resolution layer embeds multi-field represen-tations rather than single strings. Let ϕ(·) denote the embedding function introduced in the prelimi-naries. Given a record with fields f = ( f1, . . . , f k),we compute per-field embeddings ϕ(fi) and com-bine them via a weighted sum: 

Φ( f ) = norm 

> k

X

> i=1

wi ϕ(fi)

!

,

where wi are layer-specific hyperparameters. 

Entity representations (EntRes). Fields include mention name, description, type hint, intrinsic-property strings, and short evidence or context snip-pets. 

Entity class representations (EntClsRec/Ent-ClsRes). Fields include class label, class descrip-tion, evidence summaries, and member-entity sum-maries. 

Relation representations (RelRes). Fields in-clude raw relation label, relation description, end-point context (subject and object names together with entity-schema metadata), coarse relation-type hints, and qualifiers. B.3 Clustering and subclustering 

TRACE-KG uses density-based clustering (HDB-SCAN in our implementation) over representation vectors to form semantic neighborhoods. To keep LLM calls tractable, we apply two controls: (i) 

local subclustering for oversized clusters, where only members of a large cluster are reclustered; and (ii) bounded prompt batching , which processes at most K items per LLM call by splitting a cluster into batches of size K.

Practical note. Clustering output is treated as 

suggestive , not authoritative: the LLM may decide to merge none of the candidates, and multi-run reclustering can correct imperfect neighborhoods. 

B.4 Constrained action interfaces (“function calling”) 

In each resolution stage, the LLM outputs only aJSON array of action objects selected from a fixed vocabulary. Deterministic code validates identi-fiers, executes edits, and logs every applied or re-jected action. 

B.4.1 Entity resolution actions (EntRes) 

• MERGE ENTITIES : merge multiple entity mentions into one canonical entity. • MODIFY ENTITY : revise the name, descrip-tion, or type hint to prevent incorrect merges. • KEEP ENTITY (optional): explicitly keep a candidate unchanged. 

Illustrative action schemas. 

{ "action": "MergeEntities", "entity_ids": ["En_...","En_..."], "canonical_name": "...", "canonical_description": "...", "canonical_type": "...", "rationale": "..." } { "action": "ModifyEntity", "entity_id": "En_...", "new_name": "... or null", "new_description": "... or null", "new_type_hint": "... or null", "rationale": "..." } { "action": "KeepEntity", "entity_id": "En_...", "rationale": "..." } 

B.4.2 Entity class resolution actions (EntClsRes) 

• MERGE _CLASSES : merge redundant or syn-onymous classes. • SPLIT _CLASS : split overloaded classes into coherent subclasses. • CREATE _CLASS : create a missing class for a coherent subset of entities. • REASSIGN _ENTITIES : move entities between classes. • MODIFY _CLASS : revise class metadata, in-cluding class-group assignment. Each action must include a one-line justification; optional confidence scores and remarks may also be provided. Newly created or merged classes may be referenced within the same output via provisional identifiers, which are resolved deterministically by the pipeline. 

B.4.3 Relation resolution actions (RelRes) 

• SET _CANONICAL _REL : assign a canonical predicate label and description. • SET _REL _CLS : assign a relation class. • SET _REL _CLS _GROUP : assign a relation class group. • MODIFY _REL _SCHEMA : revise canonical and schema fields jointly. • ADD _REL _REMARK : attach explanatory re-marks without changing schema. • MERGE _RELATIONS : merge duplicate rela-tion instances between identical endpoints (including direction-normalized cases), only when semantics are equivalent. 

Macro relation groups. During RelRec, each relation instance includes a required single-token coarse group hint (rel_hint_type )selected from: {IDENTITY , COMPOSITION ,

CAUSALITY , TEMPORALITY , SPATIALITY ,

ROLE , PURPOSE , DEPENDENCY , COUPLING ,

TRANSFORMATION , COMPARISON ,

INFORMATION , ASSOCIATION }. RelRes may revise this hint by assigning rel_cls_group .B.5 Qualifier extraction and normalization 

RelRec emits a qualifier dictionary with exactly eight fields: 

{ "TemporalQualifier": ..., "SpatialQualifier": ..., "OperationalConstraint": ..., "ConditionExpression": ..., "UncertaintyQualifier": ..., "CausalHint": ..., "LogicalMarker": ..., "OtherQualifier": ... } 

Missing qualifiers are normalized to JSON null 

for consistency across relation instances. 

B.6 Safe duplicate relation merging and conflict handling 

When two relation instances are candidates for merging—i.e., they connect the same endpoints (after direction normalization) and express equiv-alent canonical predicates—TRACE-KG merges provenance and evidence while reconciling quali-fiers conservatively. 

Non-conflicting qualifiers. If one qualifier dic-tionary is a subset of the other, the merged relation retains the superset. 

Conflicting qualifiers. If overlapping qualifier keys have different values (e.g., distinct temporal windows), both relation instances are retained, with an explanatory remark indicating the conflict. 

Direction normalization. If duplicates are ex-pressed in opposite directions, RelRes may nor-malize them to a single direction by swapping end-points, while preserving evidence spans. 

B.7 Iteration and stopping criteria 

TRACE-KG applies iterative refinement in three stages. 

EntRes iteration. Repeat: cluster → resolve →

collapse until merges fall below a threshold or a maximum number of rounds is reached. 

EntClsRes multi-run refinement. Repeat: clus-ter candidate classes → apply structural actions until structural edits plateau over a patience win-dow or a maximum number of runs is reached. 

RelRes multi-run refinement. Repeat: cluster relation instances → apply schema actions until schema edits plateau over a patience window or a maximum number of runs is reached. 

## C Detailed Experiment Descriptions 

C.0.1 Extended Experiment 1 Details (MINE-1) Metric definitions. In addition to the standard MINE-1 retrieval accuracy (Ret.Acc), we evaluate structural and representational properties of the generated graphs. 

Connectivity (Conn.) is the fraction of nodes in the largest weakly connected component (New-man, 2003). Average degree (AvgDeg) is |E|/|V |

(Newman, 2010). Clustering coefficient (Clust.) 

measures average local clustering (Watts and Stro-gatz, 1998; Newman, 2010). Leakage (Leak%) 

quantifies lexical overlap between source text and entity strings using 4-gram overlap (Lin, 2004). 

Triple compression ratio (TriCR) is the ratio of total triple word count to source word count; val-ues near 1 indicate balanced compression, while deviations indicate information loss or redundancy (Shannon, 1948). 

Composite metrics. RWA (Reachability-Weighted Accuracy) adjusts retrieval accuracy by connectivity, reflecting that disconnected compo-nents cannot support multi-hop retrieval. EGU (Effective Graph Utilization) further discounts retrieval by leakage, reducing credit for verbatim copying (Van Rijsbergen, 1979). SCI (Structural Coherence Index) measures structural quality independently of retrieval accuracy by combining relational density, clustering, and connectivity. 

Average rank (AvgRank) measures the average rank position of the first retrieved supporting evi-dence for each query; lower values indicate more efficient retrieval. 

Structural diagnostics. Table 3 complements Ta-ble 1 by exposing graph properties underlying re-trieval performance: graph size ( |V |, |E|), entity granularity (AvgEW), relational density (AvgDeg), global connectivity (Conn.), and local cohesion (Clust.). While these are descriptive rather than direct objectives, they explain why methods with similar Ret.Acc diverge after accounting for leak-age and reachability. TRACE-KG combines compact entities (AvgEW = 2.4) with the highest average degree and cluster-ing, indicating dense and locally coherent neigh-borhoods. This aligns with its strong SCI and EGU scores in the main table. GraphRAG achieves the highest connectivity, but on much smaller graphs, suggesting connectivity driven by compres-sion rather than broad relational coverage. Au-toSchemaKG produces substantially longer entities (AvgEW = 6.6), consistent with its high leakage. OpenIE yields the largest graphs ( |V |, |E|), but low clustering indicates weak local structure despite ex-pansion. KGGen produces smaller, sparse graphs, explaining its low connectivity and reachability-adjusted performance. 

Baseline behavior and trade-offs. Au-toSchemaKG achieves the highest Ret.Acc but relies on lexical retention, reflected in high leakage and long entity strings. TRACE-KG instead maintains compact entities and strong structural properties, achieving the highest AvgDeg and clustering. GraphRAG achieves high connectivity but on small graphs ( |V | = 11 , |E| = 11 ), limiting cov-erage and reducing Ret.Acc. OpenIE expands the source heavily (TriCR = 3.201) with weak structure, whereas KGGen compresses aggressively (TriCR = 0.494) but produces fragmented graphs (Conn. = 46.1%). These patterns highlight trade-offs be-tween lexical retention, compression, and structural coherence. 

Supplementary visualizations. Figure 3 pro-vides a normalized multi-metric view. It is diagnos-tic rather than primary and should be interpreted alongside Table 1. The radar view shows that TRACE-KG remains consistently strong across re-trieval accuracy, effective retrieval after discount-ing, connectivity, clustering, and compression qual-ity, rather than excelling on a single axis. Figure 4 visualizes EGU variability across benchmark instances. Its purpose is to show that the observed performance gap is stable and not driven by outliers; the ordering in Table 1 remains consistent across instances. 

C.0.2 Extended Experiment 2 Details Dataset and evaluation setup. We use the DBpedia-WebNLG collection distributed in Text2KGBench/OSKGC (Mihindukulasooriya et al., 2023; Wang and Iwaihara, 2025), which provides 19 domain ontologies paired with sentence-level gold triples (4,860 sentences in total). Table 4 summarizes per-domain statistics. For each domain, TRACE-KG is run once on the train sentences to induce a fixed TRACE schema. Schema-to-ontology alignment judge-ments are then computed once per domain and reused across evaluation scopes. The three scopes 

> Figure 3: Normalized multi-metric profile on MINE-1. Leak is inverted, and compression is expressed as prox-imity to TriCR = 1 so that higher values are preferable on all axes.
> Figure 4: Effective Graph Utilization (EGU) on MINE-1. Error bars indicate variability across benchmark in-stances.

in the main paper ( Source , Held-out , Combined )differ only in which gold triples activate reference anchors and in their frequency weights; the induced TRACE schema and alignment mapping remain fixed. 

Schema mapping. Schema mapping is per-formed at the schema level after induction. Each reference ontology anchor is aligned against the induced TRACE schema rather than sentence-level extractions. Because TRACE induces hierarchi-cal schema structures, valid correspondences may occur at multiple abstraction levels. We therefore preserve the hierarchy during evaluation instead of flattening the schema into a single label space. 

Candidate retrieval. For each reference anchor, we retrieve a small candidate set from the induced TRACE schema prior to semantic verification. Re-trieval uses cosine similarity over weighted multi-evidence embeddings. Entity-side evidence includes schema labels across hierarchy levels and representative instance Table 3: Additional structural diagnostics complementary to Table 1. |V | and |E| denote average node and edge counts; AvgEW is average words per entity. AvgDeg is |E|/|V | (Newman, 2010); Conn. is largest weakly connected component fraction (Newman, 2003); Clust. is average clustering coefficient (Watts and Strogatz, 1998; Newman, 2010). Higher is better only for AvgDeg, Conn., and Clust.                                      

> Method |V||E|AvgEW AvgDeg ↑Conn. ↑Clust. ↑
> TRACE-KG 63 90 2.4 1.35 88.5% 0.199
> GraphRAG 11 11 1.6 0.98 91.5% 0.150 AutoSchemaKG 107 105 6.6 0.98 61.5% 0.066 OpenIE 170 253 3.2 1.26 74.0% 0.027 KGGen 84 65 1.2 0.75 46.1% 0.011

cues. Relation-side evidence includes canonical la-bels, higher-level relation classes, lexical variants, and representative subject–object examples with induced type signatures. Reference-side evidence includes ontology labels, domain/range constraints, and examples from train triples. We retrieve K=5 candidates per anchor and apply a controlled assignment step to limit fan-out and reduce spurious many-to-many correspon-dences. For reproducibility, we persist the induced schema, candidate lists with similarity scores, LLM prompts and outputs, parsed judgements, and per-domain summaries. 

LLM-based alignment and audit. Lexical sim-ilarity alone is insufficient for schema alignment under synonymy and granularity variation. We therefore use an LLM as a structured verifier for all retrieved (reference anchor, TRACE candidate) pairs. Each candidate is presented together with its hierarchical context, allowing alignment at the most appropriate abstraction level. The judge assigns one of E QUIVALENT , N AR -

> ROWER

, B ROADER , or U NRELATED , along with a confidence score. EQUIVALENT is treated as exact recovery and N ARROWER as compatible re-finement; B ROADER and U NRELATED do not con-tribute to coverage. For relations, alignment is eval-uated in a direction-relaxed manner by considering both orientations and retaining the better match. The verifier is run deterministically (temperature 

0). Low-confidence cases (confidence < 0.88 ) un-dergo targeted human audit to ensure that aggregate trends are not artifacts of unstable judgements. 

Active anchors and metrics. Metrics are com-puted under three scopes: Source , Held-out , and 

Combined . In each scope, only active reference an-chors are evaluated: ontology relations appearing in the scope’s gold triples together with their do-main and range concepts. Anchors are frequency-

Table 4: DBpedia-WebNLG statistics for Experiment 2.                                                                                  

> #Ontology #Types #Relations #Sentences
> 1University 15 46 156 2Music 15 35 290 3Airport 14 39 306 4Building 14 38 275 5Athlete 17 37 293 6Politician 19 40 319 7Company 10 28 153 8Celestial 827 194 9Astronaut 16 38 154 10 Comics 10 18 102 11 Transport 20 68 314 12 Monument 14 26 92 13 Food 12 24 398 14 Written Work 10 44 322 15 Sports Team 14 24 235 16 City 11 23 348 17 Artist 20 39 386 18 Scientist 15 47 259 19 Film 18 44 264
> Total Sentences 4,860

weighted according to scope-specific gold triple counts (Euzenat et al., 2005). We report Coverage (Exact and Compati-ble), frequency-weighted MRR@5 , and Do-main/Range Consistency (D/R). The D/R check is direction-relaxed and hierarchy-aware, allow-ing backoff to coarser TRACE types when fine-grained typing is sparse. Primitive datatypes (e.g., 

xsd:date , xsd:string ) are excluded, as they cannot be induced as text-derived classes. 

Granularity and alignment behavior. Because TRACE induces a hierarchy rather than a flat label space, successful mappings may occur at differ-ent abstraction levels. Table 5 shows that most relation alignments occur at the finest level, while concept alignments are more evenly distributed across levels. This supports the interpretation in the main paper that many successful matches arise through compatible refinement rather than exact equivalence. Table 5: Best-matching TRACE level among accepted alignments (macro-averaged, Combined).         

> Level Relations Concepts
> Finest level 64.2% 50.8% Middle level 28.7% 35.4% Coarsest level 7.1% 13.8%

Interpretation of alignment results. The Exact– Compatible gap in Table 2 primarily reflects gran-ularity mismatch rather than alignment failure. TRACE often induces more specific schema ele-ments than the reference ontology, leading to N AR - 

> ROWER

matches. Thus, compatible coverage is a more appropriate indicator of successful schema recovery than exact equivalence alone. A second pattern is that retrieval is not the pri-mary bottleneck: MRR@5 remains high, indicating that compatible candidates are typically retrieved near the top. The larger drop in relation perfor-mance under the Held-out setting reflects the diffi-culty of stabilizing relation canonicalization under sparse evidence and lexical variability. 

Failure modes and structural consistency. 

Residual failures concentrate in two regimes: (i) low-frequency relations with insufficient evidence to stabilize canonicalization, and (ii) semantically adjacent predicates whose distinction depends on context not fully captured at the sentence level. In both cases, N ARROWER matches dominate, re-flecting consistent but more fine-grained schema induction. D/R consistency is computed only over relations with compatible mappings and therefore reflects structural coherence rather than coverage. The high D/R values indicate that, once aligned, TRACE re-lations connect semantically appropriate endpoint types, supporting the claim that the induced schema is structurally consistent and reusable. 

## D Implementation Details 

Setup. An anonymized implemen-tation of TRACE-KG is available at 

https://anonymous.4open.science/ r/TRACE-KG , with additional code included in the supplementary material. All experiments were conducted on a single compute node with one GPU (gpu:1g.20gb:1 ), 16 CPU cores, and 40 GiB RAM. 

Pipeline configuration. TRACE-KG is im-plemented in Python and combines sentence-preserving chunking, transformer-based embed-dings, density-based clustering, and step-specific LLM prompting within a unified pipeline. Unless otherwise specified, all stages use gpt-5.1 with a maximum token budget of 16,000. Multimodal ingestion uses a vision-capable model ( gpt-5.1 )to convert non-text elements into structured text. 

Chunking and context. Documents are seg-mented into sentence-preserving chunks of 100– 200 tokens using spaCy ( en_core_web_sm ). Entity recognition operates at the chunk level with a context window of up to four preceding chunks. 

Embeddings and clustering. Multi-field representations are embedded using 

BAAI/bge-large-en-v1.5 (batch size 32, mean pooling, L2 normalization). Semantic neighborhoods are formed with HDBSCAN, with optional UMAP preprocessing. LLM calls are bounded by batching at most 10 items per prompt. 

LLM interaction. LLM decisions are con-strained through structured action interfaces, while execution is deterministic and validated by the pipeline. Entity recognition uses an 8,000-token limit, while resolution stages use 16,000 tokens. Temperature is omitted for GPT-5 models to en-sure stable outputs. We use six stage-specific prompt templates— Entity Recognition , Entity Res-olution , Entity Class Recognition , Entity Class Res-olution , Relation Recognition , and Relation Resolu-tion —defined in TKG_Prompts.py ; all prompts are available at https://anonymous.4open. science/r/TRACE-KG .

Experiment-specific settings. For Experiment 1, retrieval uses top-k = 8 entities with a 2-hop ex-pansion (up to 250 nodes and 300 edges), and eval-uation uses a fixed LLM judge ( gpt-5.1 ). For Experiment 2, candidate retrieval uses top-K = 5 

schema elements per anchor; alignment uses an LLM verifier (1,400-token limit, top-k = 6 ), with anchored matching threshold 0.20 and at most 3 assignments per element. Low-confidence outputs (confidence < 0.88 ) are subject to targeted human audit. 

## E Case Study 

Document and motivation. As a running case study, we use SEMI Document 6578 , a revision to 

SEMI E10-0814E , which specifies the definition and measurement of equipment reliability, avail-ability, maintainability (RAM), and utilization. The document is a strong stress test for TRACE-KG be-cause it is both technically dense and multimodal: even its opening pages combine formal purpose/s-cope statements, mutually exclusive equipment states, subsystem and cluster-tool terminology, and metric definitions such as MTBF, MCBF, MWBF, uptime, maintainability, and utilization. 

Why this document is challenging. The docu-ment mixes several levels of abstraction that are difficult to organize with flat triple extraction alone. It refers to equipment systems, subsystems, mod-ules, states, substates, downtime categories, and performance measures, while also specifying how these concepts interact. In addition, essential infor-mation is distributed across prose, equations, and diagrams rather than appearing in a single textual form. A useful representation therefore requires more than local extraction: it must consolidate re-peated technical concepts, distinguish closely re-lated but non-identical terms, and preserve prove-nance to the original evidence. 

What TRACE-KG recovers. TRACE-KG con-verts the document into a consolidated, context-enriched graph while preserving direct links to source evidence. Figure 5 shows the resulting graph at document scale. Figure 6 shows that the induced schema is not flat: resolved entities are organized into interpretable groups such as man-ufacturing processes and operations, equipment time modeling, downtime and state semantics, per-formance and reliability analysis, and equipment condition/health. On the relation side, the induced schema is dominated by causal, trigger, and metric-impact patterns, reflecting the fact that RAM stan-dards define performance through dependencies among states, events, and measurements. 

Traceability and inspection. A key property of the case study is that the graph remains au-ditable against multimodal source material. Fig-ure 7 shows representative provenance view: the resolved ARAMS equipment time/state model is grounded back to its source diagram, and the re-solved M T BF u calculation method (shown in Fig-ure 8) is grounded back to its originating equation region. Figures 9 and 10 show inspected graph instances at the node and relation levels. The re-solved node intended function of equipment ex-poses induced class assignments, confidence, de-scription, and supporting chunks, while the canoni-cal relation prevents_function exposes evi-dence, provenance, and structured qualifier fields. Together, these examples illustrate that TRACE-KG preserves not only a consolidated graph struc-ture, but also the evidence needed for technical interpretation and review. 

Takeaway. This case study illustrates the type of document for which TRACE-KG is intended: standards-like technical material in which critical knowledge is distributed across text, equations, and diagrams, and in which analysts need a reusable semantic structure rather than isolated snippets. In this setting, the value of TRACE-KG lies not only in extracting entities and relations, but in organiz-ing them into a coherent schema while maintaining end-to-end traceability. Figure 5: Overview of the constructed context-enriched knowledge graph for the case-study document. 

Figure 6: Induced entity and relation schema hierarchy for the case-study document. Figure 7: Traceability example (figure grounding): KG node linked to source diagram. 

Figure 8: Traceability example (equation grounding): KG node linked to source equation. Figure 9: Example resolved entity with schema, confidence, and provenance. 

Figure 10: Example context-enriched relation with qualifiers and provenance.